INTERNATIONAL ADVANCED LEVEL


BUSINESS
 EDEXCEL INTERNATIONAL GCSE

ECONOMICS
SPECIFICATION
SPECIFICATION
  Edexcel International GCSE in Economics (9-1) (4ET0)
Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary in Business (XBS11)
  First examination June
Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Level in Business (YBS11)
First teaching September 2018
First examination from January 2019
First certification from August 2019 (International Advanced Subsidiary) and August 2020 (International
Advanced Level)
Edexcel, BTEC and LCCI qualifications
Edexcel, BTEC and LCCI qualifications are awarded by Pearson, the UK’s largest awarding
body offering academic and vocational qualifications that are globally recognised and
benchmarked. For further information, please visit our qualification website at
qualifications.pearson.com. Alternatively, you can get in touch with us using the details on
our contact us page at qualifications.pearson.com/contactus

About Pearson
Pearson is the world's leading learning company, with 35,000 employees in more than
70 countries working to help people of all ages to make measurable progress in their lives
through learning. We put the learner at the centre of everything we do, because wherever
learning flourishes, so do people. Find out more about how we can help you and your
learners at qualifications.pearson.com




Acknowledgements
This specification has been produced by Pearson on the basis of consultation with teachers,
examiners, consultants and other interested parties. Pearson would like to thank all those
who contributed their time and expertise to the specification’s development.




References to third party material made in this specification are made in good faith. Pearson
does not endorse, approve or accept responsibility for the content of materials, which may
be subject to change, or any opinions expressed therein. (Material may include textbooks,
journals, magazines and other publications and websites.)


All information in this specification is correct at time of going to publication.


ISBN 978 1 4469 4957 3
All the material in this publication is copyright
© Pearson Education Limited 2017
Contents

About this specification                                               2
    Why choose Edexcel qualifications?                                  4
    Why choose Pearson Edexcel International Advanced
    Subsidiary/Advanced Level qualifications in Business?               5
    Supporting you in planning and implementing these qualifications    7
    Qualification at a glance                                           8

Business content                                                       11
    Unit 1: Marketing and people                                       12
    Unit 2: Managing business activities                               20
    Unit 3: Business decisions and strategy                            26
    Unit 4: Global business                                            33

Assessment information                                                 38
Administration and general information                                 41
    Entries and resitting of units                                     41
    Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, special
    consideration and malpractice                                      41
    Awarding and reporting                                             43
    Student recruitment and progression                                45

Appendices                                                             47
    Appendix 1: Codes                                                  48
    Appendix 2: Pearson World Class Qualification design principles    49
    Appendix 3: Transferable skills                                    51
    Appendix 4: Level 3 Extended Project qualification                 52
    Appendix 5: Glossary                                               55
    Appendix 6: Command words                                          56
    Appendix 7: Quantitative skills                                    57
    Appendix 8: Glossary of International Accounting Standards         58
    Appendix 9: Financial statements and accounting ratios             60
    Appendix 10: Use of calculators                                    61
About this specification

The Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary in Business and the Pearson Edexcel
International Advanced Level in Business are part of a suite of International Advanced Level
qualifications offered by Pearson.
These qualifications are not accredited or regulated by any UK regulatory body.


Key features
This specification includes the following key features.

Structure
The Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary in Business and the Pearson Edexcel
International Advanced Level in Business are modular qualifications.
The Advanced Subsidiary can be claimed on completion of the International Advanced
Subsidiary (IAS) units.
The International Advanced Level can be claimed on completion of all the units
(IAS and IA2 units).

Content
These qualifications build on the content covered in the legacy (2013) Pearson Edexcel
International Advanced Level in Business Studies. They have been updated to align them
with recent changes in the equivalent AS and A Level qualifications taken in England
and Wales.

Assessment
The qualifications are assessed by examination only.


Specification updates
This specification is Issue 1 and is valid for first teaching from September 2018. If there are
any significant changes to the specification, we will inform centres in writing. Changes will
also be posted on our website.
For more information please visit qualifications.pearson.com




2                             Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business
                              – Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
Using this specification
This specification gives teachers guidance and encourages effective delivery of these
qualifications. The following information will help you get the most out of the content
and guidance.
Compulsory content: as a minimum, all the bullet points in the content must be taught.
The word ‘including’ in content specifies the detail of what must be covered.
Assessments: teachers should deliver these qualifications using a good range of examples
to support the assessment of the content.
Depth and breadth of content: teachers should use the full range of content and all the
assessment objectives given in the subject content section.


Qualification aims and objectives
The aims and objectives of these qualifications are to enable students to:
• develop an enthusiasm for studying business
• gain an holistic understanding of business in a range of contexts
• develop a critical understanding of organisations and their ability to meet society’s needs
  and wants
• understand that business behaviour can be studied from a range of perspectives
• generate enterprising and creative approaches to business opportunities, problems
  and issues
• be aware of the ethical dilemmas and responsibilities faced by organisations
  and individuals
• acquire a range of relevant business and generic skills, including decision making,
  problem solving, the challenging of assumptions and critical analysis
• apply numerical skills in a range of business contexts.


Qualification abbreviations used in this specification
The following abbreviations appear in this specification:
International Advanced Subsidiary – IAS
International A2 – IA2 (the additional content required for an IAL)
International Advanced Level – IAL.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business –                  3
Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
Why choose Edexcel qualifications?
Pearson – the world’s largest education company
Edexcel academic qualifications are from Pearson, the UK’s largest awarding organisation.
With over 3.4 million students studying our academic and vocational qualifications
worldwide, we offer internationally recognised qualifications to schools, colleges and
employers globally.
Pearson is recognised as the world’s largest education company, allowing us to drive
innovation and provide comprehensive support for Edexcel students to acquire the
knowledge and skills they need for progression in study, work and life.

A heritage you can trust
The background to Pearson becoming the UK’s largest awarding organisation began in 1836,
when a royal charter gave the University of London its first powers to conduct exams and
confer degrees on its students. With over 150 years of international education experience,
Edexcel qualifications have a firm academic foundation, built on the traditions and rigour
associated with Britain’s educational system.
To find out more about our Edexcel heritage please visit our website:
qualifications.pearson.com/en/about-us/about-pearson/our-history

Results you can trust
Pearson’s leading online marking technology has been shown to produce exceptionally
reliable results, demonstrating that at every stage, Edexcel qualifications maintain the
highest standards.

Developed to Pearson’s world-class qualifications standards
Pearson’s world-class standards mean that all Edexcel qualifications are developed to be
rigorous, demanding, inclusive and empowering. We work collaboratively with a panel of
educational thought-leaders and assessment experts to ensure that Edexcel qualifications
are globally relevant, represent world-class best practice and maintain a consistent
standard.
For more information on the world-class qualification process and principles please go to
Appendix 2: Pearson World Class Qualifications design principles or visit our website:
uk.pearson.com/world-class-qualifications.




4                             Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business
                              – Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
Why choose Pearson Edexcel International
Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level qualifications
in Business?
We have listened to feedback from all parts of the international school subject community,
including a large number of teachers. We have made changes that will engage international
learners and give them skills that will support their progression to further study of Business
and to a wide range of other subjects.
Key qualification features:
• Helps develop a holistic understanding of business – the assessment culminates
  with a final paper that draws on the knowledge and skills students developed from Units
  1, 2 and 3.
• Development of quantitative skills – students develop these skills throughout the
  content of the course and are required to apply these skills to relevant business contexts
  within the assessment.
• Consistent command word taxonomy – we have reduced the number of command
  words used in the assessment and applied a consistent mark tariff.
• Reflects today’s global world – students develop an understanding of current global
  issues that impact on business, preparing them for their next steps in today’s global
  world.
• Provides a real business focus – students are encouraged to contextualise theory and
  respond to real-life international business case studies and stimulus material.
• Accessible assessment – to ensure all students are able to access the whole exam
  paper we have introduced ramping within each question. Questions start with a low mark
  tariff and become more challenging as students work their way through the paper,
  helping to build confidence.
• Clear and simple structure – based on your feedback we have taken the opportunity to
  make some improvements to the clarity and structure of our new specification.
• Clear and straightforward question papers – our question papers are clear and
  accessible for students of all ability ranges. Our mark schemes are straightforward so that
  the assessment requirements are clear.
• Increased level of support – Student Book, online digital resources, mapping
  documents, Scheme of Work, Getting Started Guide, Course Planner and training.
Broad and deep development of learners’ skills – we designed the International
Advanced Level qualifications to extend learners’ knowledge by broadening and deepening
skills, for example learners will:
• develop multitude of skills, including numeracy, communication and an understanding of
  research methodology and interpretation, helping ease transition on to further study
• read sources to interpret and evaluate business information
• write extended responses
• respond appropriately to a range of question types, including multiple-choice, short-
  answer, data response and open-ended questions
• develop an understanding of business concepts and apply these concepts to real-life
  situations.



Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business –                   5
Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
Progression – International Advanced Level qualifications enable successful progression to
further study or the workplace. Through our world-class qualification development process
we have consulted with higher education to validate the appropriateness of these
qualifications, including content, skills and assessment structure.
Related qualifications – Our International Advanced Level in Business sits within our wider
subject offer for Business qualifications. We also offer:
• Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Level in Economics
• Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Level in Accounting.
• Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced Subsidiary GCE in Business
• Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Business
• Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced Subsidiary GCE in Economics A
• Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Economics A
• Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced Subsidiary GCE in Economics B
• Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Economics B
• Pearson BTEC Nationals and Higher Nationals in Business.
More information can be found on our website (qualifications.pearson.com) on the
Edexcel International Advanced Level pages.




6                            Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business
                             – Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
Supporting you in planning and implementing
these qualifications
Planning
• Our Getting Started Guide gives you an overview of the Pearson Edexcel International
  Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business to help you understand the changes to
  content and assessment, and what these changes mean for you and your students.
• We will provide you with an editable course planner and scheme of work.
• Our mapping documents highlight key differences from the legacy qualifications.

Teaching and learning
• Our skills maps will opportunities for students to develop skills that are assessed, as well
  as skills that are not directly assessed.
• Print and digital learning and teaching resources – promote any time, any place learning
  to improve student motivation and encourage new ways of working.

Preparing for exams
We will also provide a range of resources to help you prepare your students for the
assessments, including:
• examiner commentaries following each examination series.

ResultsPlus
ResultsPlus provides the most detailed analysis available of your students’ examination
performance. It can help you identify the topics and skills where further learning would
benefit your students.

examWizard
A free online resource designed to support students and teachers with examination
preparation and assessment.

Training events
In addition to online training, we host a series of training events each year for teachers to
deepen their understanding of our qualifications.

Get help and support
Our subject advisor service will ensure that you receive help and guidance from us. You can
sign up to receive qualification updates and product service news at
qualifications.pearson.com or email ‘sign me up’ to TeachingBusiness@pearson.com.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business –                   7
Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
Qualification at a glance

Qualification overview

Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary in Business
This qualification consists of two externally-examined units.
The International Advanced Subsidiary is the first half of the International Advanced Level
qualification and consists of two IAS units, Units 1 and 2. This qualification may be awarded
as a discrete qualification or may contribute 50 per cent towards the International Advanced
Level qualification.

Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Level in Business
This qualification consists of four externally-examined units.
The International Advanced Level consists of the two IAS units (Units 1 and 2) plus two IA2
units (Units 3 and 4). Students wishing to take the International Advanced Level must,
therefore, complete all four units.


Course of study
The structure of these qualifications allows teachers to construct a course of study that can
be taught and assessed as either:
• distinct modules of teaching and learning with related units of assessment taken at
  appropriate stages during the course; or
• a linear course assessed in its entirety at the end.




8                             Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business
                              – Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
Content and assessment overview
IAS                                                                              *Unit code:
                                                                                 WBS11/01
Unit 1: Marketing and people
Externally assessed                                                              50% of      25% of
Written examination: 2 hours                                                     the total   the total
                                                                                 IAS         IAL
Availability: January, June and October
First assessment: January 2019
80 marks
Content overview
• Meeting customer needs
• The market
• Marketing mix and strategy
• Managing people
• Entrepreneurs and leaders
Assessment overview
Section A: Short- and extended-response questions based on sources (30 marks).
Section B: Same format as Section A, based on different sources (30 marks).
Section C: One 20-mark essay question, based on one or more sources (20 marks).


IAS                                                                              *Unit code:
                                                                                 WBS12/01
Unit 2: Managing business activities
Externally assessed                                                              50% of      25% of
Written examination: 2 hours                                                     the total   the total
                                                                                 IAS         IAL
Availability: January, June and October
First assessment: June 2019
80 marks
Content overview
• Planning a business and raising finance
• Financial planning
• Managing finance
• Resource management
• External influences
Assessment overview
Section A: Short- and extended-response questions based on sources (30 marks).
Section B: Same format as Section A, based on different sources (30 marks).
Section C: One 20-mark essay question, based on one or more sources (20 marks).




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business –                           9
Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
IA2                                                                           *Unit code:
                                                                              WBS13/01
Unit 3: Business decisions and strategy
Externally assessed                                                           50% of        25% of
Written examination: 2 hours                                                  the total     the total
                                                                              IA2           IAL
Availability: January, June and October
First assessment: January 2020
80 marks
Content overview
• Business objectives and strategy
• Business growth
• Decision-making techniques
• Influences on business decisions
• Assessing competitiveness
• Managing change
Assessment overview
Section A: Short and extended-response questions, based on sources (40 marks).
Section B: One 20-mark essay question, based on one or more sources (20 marks).
Section C: One 20-mark essay question, based on one or more sources (20 marks).


IA2                                                                           *Unit code:
                                                                              WBS14/01
Unit 4: Global business
Externally assessed                                                           50% of        25% of
Written examination: 2 hours                                                  the total     the total
                                                                              IA2           IAL
Availability: January, June and October
First assessment: June 2020
80 marks
Content overview
• Globalisation
• Global markets and business expansion
• Global marketing
• Global industries and companies (multinational corporations)
Assessment overview
Section A: Short and extended-response questions, based on sources (40 marks).
Section B: One 20-mark essay question, based on one or more sources (20 marks).
Section C: One 20-mark essay question, based on one or more sources (20 marks).
*See Appendix 1: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant to these
 qualifications.




10                             Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business
                               – Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
Business content


        Unit 1: Marketing and people                                             12
        Unit 2: Managing business activities                                     20
        Unit 3: Business decisions and strategy                                  26
        Unit 4: Global business                                                  33




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business –   11
Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
Unit 1: Marketing and people

IAS compulsory unit

Externally assessed

1.1 Unit description
                In this unit, students are introduced to the market, explore the
                marketing and people functions and investigate entrepreneurs and
                business start-up.
                This unit enables students to understand how businesses identify
                opportunities and to explore how businesses focus on developing a
                competitive advantage through interacting with customers.
                Students develop an understanding of how businesses need to
                adapt their marketing to operate in a dynamic business
                environment. It also considers people, exploring how businesses
                recruit, train, organise and motivate employees, as well as the role
                of enterprising individuals and leaders.
                Students should investigate different types and sizes of
                organisation in various business sectors and environments, and in
                local, national and global contexts.
                Students need to have acquired competence in quantitative skills
                that are relevant to this unit. A full list of quantitative skills can be
                found in Appendix 7: Quantitative skills.




1.2 Assessment information
                • First assessment: January 2019.
                • The examination lasts 2 hours.
                • The paper is marked out of 80 marks.
                • The paper will include short-open response and
                  extended-writing questions, based on sources.
                • The paper will include questions that require students to use
                  quantitative skills.
                • Calculators may be used in the examination. See Appendix 10
                  for more information.




12                 Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business
                   – Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
1.3 Unit content
1.3.1 Meeting customer needs

What students need to learn:

1 The market                a) Mass markets and niche markets:
                                • characteristics
                                • market size and market share
                                • brands.
                            b) Dynamic markets:
                                •   online retailing
                                •   how markets change
                                •   innovation and market growth
                                •   adapting to change.
                            c) How competition affects the market.
                            d) The difference between risk and uncertainty.
2 Market research           a) Primary and secondary market research data (quantitative and
                               qualitative) used to:
                                • identify and anticipate customer needs and wants
                                • quantify likely demand
                                • gain insight into consumer behaviour.
                            b) Methods of primary market research:
                                •   surveys/questionnaires
                                •   focus groups/consumer panels
                                •   face-to-face/telephone interviews
                                •   product trials/test marketing.
                            c) Methods of secondary market research market research:
                                •   websites/social media
                                •   newspapers/magazines/TV/radio
                                •   reports
                                •   databases.
                            d) Sampling methods:
                                • random
                                • quota
                                • stratified.
3 Market                    a) Product and market orientation.
  positioning
                            b) Market mapping.
                            c) Market segmentation.
                            d) Competitive advantage of a product or service.
                            e) The purpose of product differentiation.
                            f) Adding value to products/services.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business –                13
Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
1.3.2 The market

What students need to learn:

1 Demand                a) Factors leading to a change in demand:
                          •    changes in the prices of substitutes and complementary goods
                          •    changes in consumer incomes
                          •    fashions, tastes and preferences
                          •    marketing, advertising and branding
                          •    demographics
                          •    external shocks
                          •    seasonality.
2 Supply                a) Factors leading to a change in supply:
                          •    changes in the costs of production
                          •    introduction of new technology
                          •    indirect taxes
                          •    government subsidies
                          •    external shocks.
3 Markets               a) The interaction of demand and supply.
                        b) The drawing and interpretation of demand and supply diagrams to
                           show the causes and consequences of changes in demand and
                           supply.
4 Price elasticity of   a) Calculation of price elasticity of demand.
  demand (PED)
                        b) Interpretation of numerical values of price elasticity
                           of demand.
                        c) The factors influencing price elasticity of demand.
                        d) The significance of price elasticity of demand to businesses in
                           terms of implications for pricing.
                        e) Calculation and interpretation of the relationship between price
                           elasticity of demand and total revenue.
5 Income elasticity     a) Calculation of income elasticity of demand.
  of demand (YED)
                        b) Normal and inferior goods.
                        c) Interpretation of numerical values of income elasticity
                           of demand.
                        d) The factors influencing income elasticity of demand.
                        e) The significance of income elasticity of demand
                           to businesses.




14                             Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business
                               – Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
1.3.3 Marketing mix and strategy

What students need to learn:

1 Marketing                 a) Marketing objectives
  objectives and                • increase market share
  strategy                      • increase revenue
                                • building a brand.
                            b) The product life cycle and extension strategies.
                            c) The Boston Matrix and the product portfolio.
                            d) The concept of ‘marketing mix’.
                            e) Marketing strategies appropriate for different types of market:
                                •   mass markets
                                •   niche markets
                                •   business to business (B2B)
                                •   business to consumer (B2C).
                            f) Consumer behaviour – how businesses develop customer loyalty.
2 Product/service           a) Design mix:
  design                        • function
                                • aesthetics
                                • cost/economic manufacture.
                            b) Changes in the elements of the design mix to reflect social trends:
                                • concern over resource depletion: designing for waste
                                  minimisation, re-use and recycling
                                • ethical sourcing.
3 Promotion and             a) Types of promotion.
  branding
                            b) Types of branding.
                            c) The benefits of strong branding:
                                • added value
                                • ability to charge premium prices
                                • reduced price elasticity of demand.
                            d) Ways to build a brand:
                                •   unique selling points (USPs)/differentiation
                                •   advertising
                                •   sponsorship
                                •   the use of social media.
                            e) Changes in branding and promotion to reflect social trends:
                                • viral marketing
                                • social media
                                • emotional branding.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business –                   15
Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
1.3.3 Marketing mix and strategy (continued)

What students need to learn:

4 Pricing strategies   a) Types of pricing strategy:
                         •     cost plus (mark-up on unit cost)
                         •     price skimming
                         •     penetration
                         •     predatory
                         •     competitive
                         •     psychological.
                       b) Factors that determine the most appropriate pricing strategy for a
                          particular situation:
                         •     number of USPs/amount of differentiation
                         •     price elasticity of demand
                         •     level of competition in the business environment
                         •     strength of brand
                         •     stage in the product life cycle
                         •     costs and the need to make a profit.
                       c) Changes in pricing to reflect social trends:
                         • online sales
                         • price comparison sites.
5 Distribution         a) Distribution channels:
                         • four stage: producer to wholesaler to retailer to consumer
                         • three stage: producer to retailer to consumer
                         • two stage: producer to consumer.
                       b) Changes in distribution methods.




16                             Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business
                               – Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
1.3.4 Managing people

What students need to learn:

1 Approaches to             a) Staff as an asset; staff as a cost.
  staffing
                            b) Flexible workforce:
                                •   multi-skilling
                                •   part-time and temporary
                                •   zero-hour contracts
                                •   flexible hours and home working
                                •   outsourcing.
                            c) Distinction between dismissal and redundancy.
                            d) Employer/employee relationships
                                • individual approach
                                • collective bargaining.
2 Recruitment,              a) Recruitment and selection process:
  selection and                 • internal versus external recruitment.
  training
                            b) Costs of recruitment, selection and training
                            c) Types of training:
                                • induction
                                • on-the-job
                                • off-the-job.
3 Organisational            a) Structure:
  design                        •   hierarchy
                                •   chain of command
                                •   span of control
                                •   centralised and decentralised.
                            b) Types of structure:
                                • tall
                                • flat
                                • matrix.
                            c) Impact of different organisational structures on business
                               efficiency and employee motivation.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business –             17
Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
1.3.4 Managing people (continued)

What students need to learn:



4 Motivation in       a) The importance of employee motivation to a business
  theory and
                      b) Motivation theories:
  practice
                         •     Taylor (scientific management)
                         •     Mayo (human relations theory)
                         •     Maslow (hierarchy of needs)
                         •     Herzberg (two-factor theory).
                      c) Financial methods to improve employee performance:
                         •     piecework
                         •     commission
                         •     bonus
                         •     profit share
                         •     performance-related pay.
                      d) Non-financial methods to improve employee performance:
                         •     delegation
                         •     consultation
                         •     empowerment
                         •     team working
                         •     flexible working
                         •     job enrichment
                         •     job rotation
                         •     job enlargement.
5 Leadership          a) Leadership:
                         • the distinction between management and leadership.
                      b) Types of leadership style:
                         •     autocratic
                         •     paternalistic
                         •     democratic
                         •     laissez-faire.
                      c) The difficulty of moving from entrepreneur to leader.




18                             Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business
                               – Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
1.3.5 Entrepreneurs and leaders

What students need to learn:

1 Role of an                a) Creating and setting up a business.
  entrepreneur
                            b) Running and expanding/developing a business.
                            c) Innovation within a business (intrapreneurship).
                            d) Barriers to entrepreneurship.
                            e) Anticipating risk and uncertainty in the business environment.
2 Entrepreneurial           a) Characteristics and skills required.
  motives and
                            b) Reasons why people set up businesses:
  characteristics
                                • financial motives: profit maximisation and profit satisficing
                                • non-financial motives: ethical stance, social entrepreneurship,
                                  independence and home working.
3 Business                  a) Survival.
  objectives
                            b) Profit maximisation.
                            c) Other objectives:
                                •   sales maximisation
                                •   market share
                                •   cost efficiency
                                •   employee welfare
                                •   customer satisfaction
                                •   social objectives.
4 Business choices          a) Opportunity cost.
                            b) Trade-offs.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business –                  19
Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
Unit 2: Managing business activities

IAS compulsory unit

Externally assessed

2.1 Unit description
                In this unit, students explore the finance and operations functions,
                and investigate external influences on business.
                This unit enables students to develop an understanding of raising
                and managing finance, and measuring business performance.
                It outlines the importance of using resources efficiently within a
                business to ensure that goods or services can be delivered
                effectively and efficiently, and to a high quality. Students also
                consider the external influences that have an impact on
                businesses, including economic and legal factors.
                Students should investigate different types and sizes of
                organisation in various business sectors and environments, and in
                local, national and global contexts.
                Students need to have acquired competence in quantitative skills
                relevant to this unit. A full list of quantitative skills can be found in
                Appendix 7: Quantitative skills.
                For this unit, students will also need to be able to apply the
                accounting ratios given in Appendix 9: Financial statements and
                accounting ratios. These ratios will not be supplied in the
                examination.




2.2 Assessment information
                • First assessment: June 2019.
                • The examination lasts 2 hours.
                • The paper is marked out of 80 marks.
                • The paper will include short open-response and
                  extended-writing questions, based on sources.
                • Questions may require students to draw on their knowledge
                  from Unit 1.
                • The paper will include questions that require students to use
                  quantitative skills.
                • Calculators may be used in the examination. See
                  Appendix 10 for more information.




20                 Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business
                   – Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
2.3 Unit content
2.3.1 Planning a business and raising finance

What students need to learn:

1 Planning                  a) Content of a business plan.
                            b) Relevance and uses of a business plan.
2 Internal finance          a) Owner’s capital: personal savings.
                            b) Retained profit.
                            c) Sale of assets.
3 External finance          a) Sources of finance and their suitability for different
                               circumstances:
                                •   family and friends
                                •   banks
                                •   peer-to-peer funding
                                •   business angels
                                •   crowd funding
                                •   other businesses.
                            b) Methods of finance and their suitability for different
                               circumstances:
                                •   loans
                                •   share capital
                                •   venture capital
                                •   overdrafts
                                •   leasing
                                •   trade credit
                                •   grants.
4 Forms of                  a) Sole trader, partnership and private limited company (Ltd).
  business
                            b) Franchising, social enterprise, lifestyle businesses, online
                               businesses.
                            c) Growth to public limited companies (plc) and stock market
                               flotation.
5 Liability                 a) Implications of limited and unlimited liability, including
                               advantages and disadvantages.
                            b) Finance appropriate for limited and unlimited liability businesses.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business –                  21
Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
2.3.2 Financial planning

What students need to learn:

1 Sales, revenue      a) Calculation of sales volume and sales revenue.
  and costs
                      b) Calculation of fixed, variable costs, total costs and
                         average costs.
                      c) Ways of improving sales volumes and sales revenues.
2 Sales forecasting   a) Purpose of sales forecasts.
                      b) Factors affecting sales forecasts:
                         • consumer trends
                         • economic variables
                         • actions of competitors.
                      c) Difficulties of sales forecasting.
3 Break-even          a) Contribution: selling price − variable cost per unit.
                      b) Break-even point:
                         • total fixed costs + total variable costs = total revenue.
                      c) Using contribution to calculate the break-even point.
                      d) Margin of safety.
                      e) Interpretation of break-even charts.
                      f) Limitations of break-even analysis.
4 Cash flow           a) Construction and interpretation of simple cash-flow forecasts.
                      b) Use and limitations of cash-flow forecasts.
5 Budgets             a) Purposes of budgets.
                      b) Types of budget:
                         • based on historical figures
                         • zero based.
                      c) Variance analysis.
                      d) Difficulties of budgeting.




22                             Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business
                               – Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
2.3.3 Managing finance

What students need to learn:

1 Profit                    a) Calculation of:
                                • gross profit
                                • operating profit
                                • profit for the year (net profit).
                            b) Ways to increase profits.
                            c) Statement of comprehensive income (profit and loss account):
                                • measuring profitability: calculation of gross profit margin,
                                  operating profit margin, and profit for the year (net profit)
                                  margin
                                • ways to improve profitability.
2 Liquidity                 a) Distinction between profit and cash.
                            b) Statement of financial position (balance sheet):
                                • measuring liquidity: calculating current ratio and
                                  acid test ratio
                                • ways to improve liquidity, including assets, supplier credit
                                  terms, factoring, inventory JIT.
                            c) Working capital and its management: the importance
                               of cash.
3 Business failure          a) Internal causes of business failure:
                                •   poor management of cash flow
                                •   overestimation of sales
                                •   overtrading
                                •   poor inventory control
                                •   poor marketing
                                •   poor quality.
                            b) External causes of business failure:
                                •   market conditions
                                •   competition
                                •   economic
                                •   exchange rates
                                •   interest rates
                                •   government regulations
                                •   supplier problems
                                •   natural phenomena.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business –                    23
Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
2.3.4 Resource management

What students need to learn:

1 Production,         a) Methods of production:
  productivity and       •     job
  efficiency             •     batch
                         •     flow
                         •     cell.
                      b) Productivity:
                         •     output per unit of input per time period
                         •     factors influencing productivity
                         •     link between productivity and competitiveness
                         •     ways to improve productivity.
                      c) Efficiency:
                         • production at minimum average cost
                         • factors influencing efficiency
                         • ways to improve efficiency.
                      d) The distinction between labour- and capital-intensive production.
                      e) Competitive advantage from short product lead-in times.
2 Capacity            a) Capacity utilisation: current output (divided by) maximum
  utilisation            possible output (× 100).
                      b) Implications of under- and over-utilisation of capacity.
                      c) Ways of improving capacity utilisation
                         (under and over utilisation).
3 Inventory control   a) Interpretation of inventory control diagram.
                      b) Buffer inventory.
                      c) Implications of poor inventory control.
                      d) Just in time (JIT).
                      e) Waste minimisation.
                      f) Competitive advantage from lean production.
4 Quality             a) Quality:
  management             • control
                         • assurance
                         • circles.
                      b) Total Quality Management (TQM).
                      c) Continuous improvement (Kaizen).
                      d) Competitive advantage from quality management.




24                             Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business
                               – Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
2.3.5 External influences

What students need to learn:

1 Economic                  a) The effect on businesses of, and how they can best respond to,
  influences                   changes in:
                                •   the rate of inflation
                                •   exchange rates (appreciation, depreciation)
                                •   interest rates
                                •   taxation and government spending
                                •   the business cycle.
2 Legislation               a) The effects on businesses of:
                                •   consumer protection
                                •   employee protection
                                •   environmental protection
                                •   competition policy
                                •   health and safety
                                •   intellectual property rights (copyright, patents
                                    and trademarks).
3 The competitive           a) The effects on businesses of competition in terms of competitor:
  environment                   • numbers
                                • size
                                • behaviour.
                            b) Ways for a small business to compete in a competitive market.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business –                  25
Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
Unit 3: Business decisions and strategy

IA2 compulsory unit

Externally assessed

3.1 Unit description
                In this unit, students develop their understanding of the concepts
                introduced in Units 1 and 2, and explore influences on business
                strategy and decision making.
                This unit moves from functions to strategy, enabling students to
                develop their understanding of the core concepts and to take a
                strategic view of business opportunities and issues. Students
                analyse corporate objectives and strategy against financial and
                non-financial performance measures and how businesses grow,
                and develop an understanding of the impact of external influences.
                The unit also covers the causes and effects of change and how
                businesses mitigate risk and uncertainty.
                Students should investigate different types and sizes of
                organisation in various business sectors and environments, and in
                local, national and global contexts.
                Students need to have acquired competence in quantitative skills
                that are relevant to this unit. A full list of quantitative skills can be
                found in Appendix 7: Quantitative skills.
                For this unit, students will also need to be able to apply the
                accounting ratios given in Appendix 9: Financial statements and
                accounting ratios. These ratios will not be supplied in the
                examination.




3.2 Assessment information
                • First assessment: January 2020.
                • The examination lasts 2 hours.
                • The paper is marked out of 80 marks.
                • The paper will include short open-response and
                  extended-writing questions, based on sources.
                • Questions may require students to draw on their knowledge
                  from Units 1 and 2.
                • The paper will include short-open response and
                  extended-writing questions, based on sources.
                • The paper will include questions that require students to use
                  quantitative skills.
                • Calculators may be used in the examination. See
                  Appendix 10 for more information.


26                 Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business
                   – Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
3.3 Unit content
3.3.1 Business objectives and strategy

What students need to learn:

1 Corporate                 a) Development of corporate objectives from mission
  objectives                   statement/corporate aims.
                            b) Critical appraisal of mission statements.
2 Theories of               a) Development of corporate strategy:
  corporate                     • Ansoff’s Matrix
  strategy                      • Porter’s Strategic Matrix.
                            b) Aim of portfolio analysis.
                            c) Effect of strategic and tactical decisions on human, physical, and
                               financial resources.
3 SWOT analysis             a) SWOT analysis
                                • internal considerations: strengths and weaknesses
                                • external considerations: opportunities and threats.
4 Impact of                 a) PESTLE (political, economic, social, technological, legal and
  external                     environmental).
  influences
                            b) The changing competitive environment.
                            c) Porter’s five forces.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business –                  27
Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
3.3.2 Business growth

What students need to learn:

1 Growth              a) Objectives of growth:
                         •     economies of scale (internal and external)
                         •     increased market power over customers and suppliers
                         •     increased market share and brand recognition
                         •     increased profitability.
                      b) The distinction between inorganic and organic growth.
2 Organic growth      a) Methods of growing organically.
                      b) Advantages and disadvantages of organic growth.
3 Inorganic growth    a) Mergers and takeovers:
                         •     reasons for mergers and takeovers
                         •     distinction between mergers and takeovers
                         •     horizontal and vertical integration
                         •     conglomerates
                         •     financial risks and rewards.
                      b) Advantages and disadvantages of inorganic growth.
4 Problems arising    a) Diseconomies of scale.
  from growth
                      b) Internal communication.
                      c) Overtrading.




28                             Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business
                               – Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
3.3.3 Decision-making techniques

What students need to learn:

1 Quantitative              a) Calculation of time-series analysis: moving averages
  sales forecasting            (three period/four quarter).
                            b) Interpretation of scatter graphs and line of best fit: extrapolation
                               of past data to future.
                            c) Limitations of quantitative sales forecasting techniques.
2 Investment                a) Simple payback.
  appraisal
                            b) Average (accounting) rate of return.
                            c) Discounted cash flow (net present value only).
                            d) Calculations and interpretations of figures generated by these
                               techniques.
                            e) Limitations of these techniques.
3 Decision trees            a) Construct and interpret simple decision-tree diagrams.
                            b) Calculations and interpretations of figures generated by these
                               techniques.
                            c) Limitations of using decision trees.
4 Critical path             a) Nature and purpose of critical path analysis.
  analysis
                            b) Complete and interpret simple networks to identify the critical
                               path.
                            c) Calculate:
                                • earliest start time
                                • latest finish time
                                • total float.
                            d) Limitations of using critical path analysis.
5 Contribution              a) Nature and purpose of contribution.
                            b) Calculation and interpretation of contribution.
                            c) Use of contribution as a decision-making technique.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business –                   29
Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
3.3.4 Influences on business decisions

What students need to learn:

1 Corporate culture   a) Strong and weak cultures.
                      b) Classification of company cultures:
                         •     power
                         •     role
                         •     task
                         •     person.
                      c) How corporate culture is formed.
                      d) Difficulties in changing an established culture.
2 Stakeholder         a) Internal and external stakeholders.
  model versus
                      b) Stakeholder objectives.
  shareholder
  model               c) Stakeholder and shareholder influences:
                         • stakeholder: that the business considers all of its stakeholders
                           in its business decisions/objectives
                         • shareholder: that the business should focus purely on
                           shareholder returns (increasing share price and dividends) in
                           its business decisions/objectives.
                      d) The potential for conflict between profit-based (shareholder) and
                         wider objectives (stakeholder).
3 Business ethics     a) Ethics of strategic decisions: trade-offs between profit
                         and ethics.
                      b) Pay and rewards.
                      c) Corporate social responsibility (CSR).




30                             Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business
                               – Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
3.3.5 Assessing competitiveness

What students need to learn:

1 Interpretation of         a) Statement of comprehensive income (profit and
  financial                    loss account):
  statements                    • key information
                                • stakeholder interest.
                            b) Statement of financial position (balance sheet)
                                • key information
                                • stakeholder interest.
2 Ratio analysis            a) Calculate:
                                • profitability (gross profit margin and profit for the
                                  year margin)
                                • liquidity (current and acid test ratios)
                                • gearing ratio
                                • return on capital employed (ROCE).
                            b) Interpret ratios to make business decisions.
                            c) The limitations of ratio analysis.
3 Human resources           a) Calculate and interpret the following to help make business
                               decisions:
                                • labour productivity
                                • labour turnover and retention
                                • absenteeism.
                            b) Limitations of these calculations.
                            c) Human resource strategies to increase productivity and retention
                               and to reduce turnover and absenteeism:
                                •   financial rewards
                                •   employee share ownership
                                •   consultation strategies
                                •   empowerment strategies.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business –               31
Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
3.3.6 Manging change

What students need to learn:

1 Key factors in      a) Organisational culture.
  change
                      b) Size of organisation.
                      c) Time/speed of change.
                      d) Managing resistance to change.
                      e) Transformative leadership.
2 Contingency         a) Identifying key risks through risk assessment:
  planning               • natural disasters
                         • IT systems failure
                         • loss of key staff.
                      b) Planning for risk mitigation:
                         • business continuity
                         • succession planning.




32                             Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business
                               – Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
Unit 4: Global business

IA2 compulsory unit

Externally assessed

4.1 Unit description
                               In this unit, students develop their understanding of the concepts
                               introduced in Units 1, 2 and 3, and explore business activity in a
                               global context.
                               Students investigate businesses that trade on a global scale and
                               explore their reasons for doing so. Students develop an
                               understanding of the globally competitive environment and
                               consider the ethical and moral dimensions of global business
                               activities. In this unit, it is important to note that the impacts of
                               globalisation and global markets covered in 4.3.1 and 4.3.2 will
                               need to be understood in relation to businesses.
                               Students should investigate different types and sizes of
                               organisation in various business sectors and environments.
                               Students need to have acquired competence in quantitative skills
                               relevant to this unit. A full list of quantitative skills can be found in
                               Appendix 7: Quantitative skills.




4.2 Assessment information
                               • First assessment: June 2020.
                               • The examination lasts 2 hours.
                               • The paper is marked out of 80 marks.
                               • The paper will include short open-response and
                                 extended-writing questions.
                               • Questions may require students to draw on their knowledge
                                 from Units 1, 2 and 3.
                               • The paper will include questions that require students to use
                                 quantitative skills.
                               • Calculators may be used in the examination. See Appendix 10
                                 for more information.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business –                         33
Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
4.3 Unit content
4.3.1 Globalisation

What students need to learn:

1 Growing              a) Characteristics of developed, developing and emerging
  economies               economies.
                       b) Growing economic power of countries within Asia, Africa and other
                          parts of the world.
                       c) Implications of economic growth for individuals and businesses:
                          • trade opportunities for businesses
                          • employment patterns.
                       d) Indicators of growth:
                          • gross domestic product (GDP) and GDP per capita
                          • human development index (HDI).
2 International        a) Exports and imports.
  trade and
                       b) Implications of increasing specialisation by countries and
  business growth
                          businesses.
                       c) Foreign direct investment (FDI) and link to business growth.
3 Factors              a) Trade liberalisation, the reduction of trade barriers and the role of
  contributing to         the WTO.
  increased
                       b) Political change.
  globalisation
                       c) Reduced cost of transport and communication.
                       d) Increased significance of global (multinational) corporations
                          (MNCs).
                       e) Increased investment flows (FDI).
                       f) Migration within and between economies.
                       g) Growth of the global labour force.
                       h) Structural change.
                       i) Impact on businesses of increased globalisation.
4 Protectionism        a) Reasons for protectionism.
                       b) Tariffs.
                       c) Import quotas.
                       d) Other trade barriers:
                          • government legislation
                          • domestic subsidies.
                       e) Impact on businesses of protectionism.
5 Trading blocs        a) Expansion of trading blocs:
                          • EU and the single market
                          • ASEAN
                          • NAFTA.
                       b) The impact on businesses of trading blocs.


34                             Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business
                               – Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
4.3.2 Global markets and business expansion

What students need to learn:

1 Conditions that           a) Push factors:
  prompt trade                 • saturated markets
                               • competition.
                            b) Pull factors:
                               • increased sales and profitability
                               • risk spreading and economies of scale.
                            c) Cost competitiveness by off-shoring and outsourcing.
                            d) Extending the product life cycle.
2 Assessment of a           a) Factors to consider:
  country as a                 •   levels and growth of disposable income
  market                       •   ease of doing business
                               •   infrastructure
                               •   political stability
                               •   exchange rates.
                            b) Application of Porter’s five forces in assessing
                               potential markets.
3 Assessment of a           a) Factors to consider:
  country as a                 •   costs of production
  production                   •   skills and availability of labour force
  location
                               •   infrastructure
                               •   location in trade bloc
                               •   government incentives
                               •   ease of doing business
                               •   political stability
                               •   natural resources
                               •   likely return on investment.
4 Reasons for               a) Spreading risk and economies of scale.
  global mergers,
                            b) Entering new markets/trade blocs.
  takeovers or
  joint ventures            c) Acquiring national/international brand names/patents.
                            d) Securing resources/supplies.
                            e) Maintaining/increasing global competitiveness.
                            f) Reducing competition.
                            g) Making use of local knowledge.
                            h) Government or legal requirement.
                            i) Accessing supply chains/distribution networks.
                            j) Sharing costs/risks.
5 Global expansion          a) The impact on businesses of movements in exchange rates.
  and uncertainty
                            b) Skill shortages and their impact on international competitiveness.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business –                 35
Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
4.3.3 Global marketing

What students need to learn:

1 Marketing            a) Global marketing strategy and global localisation (glocalisation).
                       b) Different marketing approaches:
                         • domestic/ethnocentric
                         • mixed/geocentric
                         • international/polycentric.
                       c) Application and adaptation of the marketing mix (4Ps) to global
                          markets.
                       d) Application of Ansoff’s matrix and Porter’s matrix to global
                          marketing decisions.
2 Niche markets        a) Cultural diversity: recognition that groups of people across the
                          globe have different interests and values.
                       b) Features of global niche markets.
                       c) Application and adaptation of the marketing mix (4Ps) to suit
                          global niches.
3 Cultural/social      a) Considerations for businesses:
  factors                •     cultural differences
                         •     different tastes and preferences
                         •     language and unintended meanings
                         •     inappropriate branding and promotion.




36                             Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business
                               – Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
4.3.4 Global industries and companies (multinational corporations)

What students need to learn:

1 The impact of             a) Impact of MNCs on the local economy:
  MNCs                         • local labour, wages, working conditions and job creation
                               • local businesses
                               • the local community and environment.
                            b) Impact of MNCs on the national economy:
                               •   economic growth
                               •   FDI flows
                               •   balance of payments
                               •   technology and skills transfer
                               •   consumers
                               •   business culture
                               •   tax revenues.
2 International             a) Stakeholder conflicts.
  business ethics
                            b) Environmental considerations:
                               • emissions and waste disposal
                               • sustainability.
                            c) Supply chain considerations:
                               • pay and working conditions
                               • exploitation of labour and child labour.
                            d) Marketing considerations:
                               • misleading product labelling
                               • inappropriate marketing activities.
3 Controlling MNCs          a) Factors to consider:
                               •   power of MNC
                               •   political influence
                               •   legal control
                               •   consumer pressure
                               •   pressure groups
                               •   social media
                               •   self-regulation.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business –              37
Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
Assessment information

Assessment requirements
The Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary in Business consists of two
externally-examined units.
The Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Level in Business consists of four
externally-examined units.
Students must complete all assessments.
Please see the Assessment availability and first award section for information on when the
assessment for each unit will be available.



Unit                      IAS or    Assessment information                            Number of raw
                          IA2                                                         marks allocated
                                                                                      in the unit

Unit 1: Marketing and     IAS       Section A: Short- and extended-response           80 marks
people                              questions based on sources
                                    (30 marks).

                                    Section B: Short- and extended-response
                                    questions based on sources
                                    (30 marks).

                                    Section C: One 20-mark essay question,
                                    based on one or more sources
                                    (20 marks).

Unit 2: Managing          IAS       Same as Unit 1.                                   80 marks
business activities

Unit 3: Business          IA2       Section A: Short- and extended-response           80 marks
decisions and strategy              questions based on sources
                                    (40 marks).

                                    Section B: One essay question, based on
                                    one or more sources
                                    (20 marks).

                                    Section C: One essay question, based on
                                    one or more sources
                                    (20 marks).

Unit 4: Global business   IA2       Same as Unit 3.                                   80 marks


Sample assessment materials
Sample papers and mark schemes can be found in the Pearson Edexcel International
Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs)
document.
A full list of command words that will be used in the assessments can be found in
Appendix 6.
Assessment materials will use terminology consistent with International Accounting
Standards. See Appendix 8 for more information.

38                              Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business
                                – Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
Assessment objectives and weightings
                                                                                    % in    % in     % in
                                                                                    IAS     IA2      IAL
AO1        Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of terms,
                                                                                    27.5     20      23.8
           concepts, theories, methods and models
AO2        Apply knowledge and understanding to various business
           contexts to show how individuals and organisations are                      25   22.5     23.8
           affected by and respond to issues
AO3        Analyse business issues, showing an understanding of
           the causes, costs and consequences for individuals and                   27.5     30      28.8
           organisations
AO4        Evaluate evidence to make informed judgements and
                                                                                       20   27.5     23.8
           propose evidence-based solutions to business issues
NB Totals have been rounded up or down.



Relationship of assessment objectives to units for the
International Advanced Subsidiary qualification
Unit number                                              Assessment objective
                                       AO1                 AO2                   AO3               AO4

Unit 1                               13.75%               12.5%              13.75%                10%
Unit 2                               13.75%               12.5%              13.75%                10%
Total for International
                                     27.5%                25%                27.5%                20%
Advanced Subsidiary

NB Totals have been rounded up or down.



Relationship of assessment objectives to units for the
International Advanced Level qualification
Unit number                                              Assessment objective
                                       AO1                 AO2                   AO3               AO4

Unit 1                                6.9%                 6.3%                  6.9%              5%
Unit 2                                6.9%                 6.3%                  6.9%              5%
Unit 3                                  5%                 5.6%                  7.5%              6.9%
Unit 4                                  5%                 5.6%                  7.5%              6.9%
Total for International
                                     23.8%               23.8%                   28.8%         23.8%
Advanced Level

NB Totals have been rounded up or down.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business –                            39
Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
Assessment availability and first award
                   January           June            October           January             June
Unit                2019             2019             2019              2020               2020

1                                                                                         
2                                                                                         
3                                                                                         
4                                                                                         
IAS award                                                                                 
IAL award                                                                                 


From June 2020, all four units will be assessed in January, June and October for the
lifetime of the qualifications.
From June 2020 IAL and IAS will both be awarded in January, June and October for the
lifetime of the qualifications.




40                           Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business
                             – Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
Administration and general information

Entries and resitting of units

Entries
Details of how to enter students for the examinations for these qualifications can be found in
our International Information Manual. A copy is made available to all examinations officers
and is available on our website, qualifications.pearson.com.


Resitting of units
Students can resit any unit irrespective of whether the qualification is to be cashed in. If a
student resits a unit more than once, only the better of the two most recent attempts of that
unit will be available for aggregation to a qualification grade. Please refer to the
Entry, Aggregation and Certification document on our website:
qualifications.pearson.com/IAL-entry-certification-procedures.


Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments,
special consideration and malpractice
Equality and fairness are central to our work. Our equality policy requires all students to
have equal opportunity to access our qualifications and assessments, and our qualifications
to be awarded in a way that is fair to every student.
We are committed to making sure that:
• students with a protected characteristic (as defined by the UK Equality Act 2010) are not,
  when they are undertaking one of our qualifications, disadvantaged in comparison to
  students who do not share that characteristic
• all students achieve the recognition they deserve for undertaking a qualification and that
  this achievement can be compared fairly to the achievement of their peers.


Language of assessment
Assessment of these qualifications will be available in English only. All student work must be
in English.
We recommend that students are able to read and write in English at Level B2 of the
Common European Framework of Reference for Languages.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business –              41
Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
Access arrangements
Access arrangements are agreed before an assessment. They allow students with special
educational needs, disabilities or temporary injuries to:
• access the assessment
• show what they know and can do without changing the demands of the assessment.
The intention behind an access arrangement is to meet the particular needs of an individual
student with a disability without affecting the integrity of the assessment. Access
arrangements are the principal way in which awarding bodies comply with the duty under
the Equality Act 2010 to make ‘reasonable adjustments’.
Access arrangements should always be processed at the start of the course. Students will
then know what is available and have the access arrangement(s) in place for assessment.


Reasonable adjustments
The Equality Act 2010 requires an awarding organisation to make reasonable adjustments
where a student with a disability would be at a substantial disadvantage in undertaking an
assessment. The awarding organisation is required to take reasonable steps to overcome
that disadvantage.
A reasonable adjustment for a particular student may be unique to that individual and
therefore might not be in the list of available access arrangements.
Whether an adjustment will be considered reasonable will depend on a number of factors,
including:
• the needs of the student with the disability
• the effectiveness of the adjustment
• the cost of the adjustment; and
• the likely impact of the adjustment on the student with the disability and other students.
An adjustment will not be approved if it involves unreasonable costs to the awarding
organisation, timeframes or affects the security or integrity of the assessment. This is
because the adjustment is not ‘reasonable’.


Special consideration
Special consideration is a post-examination adjustment to a student's mark or grade to
reflect temporary injury, illness or other indisposition at the time of the examination/
assessment, which has had, or is reasonably likely to have had, a material effect on a
candidate’s ability to take an assessment or demonstrate their level of attainment in an
assessment.


Further information
Please see our website for further information about how to apply for access arrangements
and special consideration.
For further information about access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and special
consideration please refer to the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk.




42                            Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business
                              – Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
Candidate malpractice
Candidate malpractice refers to any act by a candidate that compromises or seeks to
compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the integrity of the
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates.
Candidate malpractice in controlled assessments discovered before the candidate has signed
the declaration of authentication form does not need to be reported to Pearson.
Candidate malpractice found in controlled assessments after the declaration of authenticity
has been signed, and in examinations must be reported to Pearson on a JCQ Form M1
(available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The completed form can be
emailed to pqsmalpractice@pearson.com or posted to: Investigations Team, Pearson,
190 High Holborn, London, WC1V 7BH. Please provide as much information and supporting
documentation as possible. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions lies
with Pearson.
Failure to report candidate malpractice constitutes staff or centre malpractice.

Staff/centre malpractice
Staff and centre malpractice includes both deliberate malpractice and maladministration of
our qualifications. As with candidate malpractice, staff and centre malpractice is any act that
compromises or seeks to compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the
integrity of the qualifications or the validity of results/certificates.
All cases of suspected staff malpractice and maladministration must be reported
immediately, before any investigation is undertaken by the centre, to Pearson on a
JCQ Form M2(a) (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice).
The form, supporting documentation and as much information as possible can be emailed to
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com or posted to: Investigations Team, Pearson,
190 High Holborn, London, WC1V 7BH. Note that the final decision regarding
appropriate sanctions lies with Pearson.
Failure to report malpractice itself constitutes malpractice.
More-detailed guidance on malpractice can be found in the latest version of the document
JCQ General and vocational qualifications Suspected Malpractice in Examinations and
Assessments, available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice.


Awarding and reporting
The Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary in Business will be graded on a five-
grade scale from A to E. The Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Level in Business will
be graded on a six-point scale A* to E. Individual unit results will be reported. Only Units 1
and 2 will contribute to the International Advanced Subsidiary grade. All four units will
contribute to the International Advanced Level grade.
The first certification opportunity for the Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary
in Business will be in August 2019. The first certification opportunity for the Pearson Edexcel
International Advanced Level in Business will be in August 2020. A pass in an International
Advanced Subsidiary subject is indicated by one of the five grades A, B, C, D, E, of which
grade A is the highest and grade E the lowest. A pass in an International Advanced Level
subject is indicated by one of the six grades A*, A, B, C, D, E, of which grade A* is the
highest and grade E the lowest. Students whose level of achievement is below the minimum
judged by Pearson to be of sufficient standard to be recorded on a certificate will receive an
unclassified U result.



Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business –               43
Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
Unit results
Students will receive a uniform mark between 0 and the maximum uniform mark for
each unit.
The uniform marks at each grade threshold for each unit are:
Units 1, 2, 3 and 4
                    Maximum
Unit grade                              A          B           C          D           E
                  uniform mark
                       100             80          70         60         50          40



Qualification results
The minimum uniform marks required for each grade:


International Advanced Subsidiary (cash-in code: XBS11)
Qualification       Maximum
                                        A          B           C          D           E
grade             uniform mark
                       200            160         140        120         100         80

Students with a uniform mark in the range 0–79 will be Unclassified (U).


International Advanced Level (cash-in code: YBS11)
Qualification       Maximum
                                        A          B           C          D           E
grade             uniform mark
                       400            320         280        240         200        160

Students with a uniform mark in the range 0–159 will be Unclassified (U).
To be awarded an A*, students will need to achieve an A for the International Advanced
Level qualification (at least 320 uniform marks) and at least 90% of the total uniform mark
available across the IA2 units combined (at least 180 uniform marks).




44                           Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business
                             – Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
Student recruitment and progression
Pearson follows the JCQ policy concerning recruitment to our qualifications in that:
• they must be available to anyone who is capable of reaching the required standard
• they must be free from barriers that restrict access and progression
• equal opportunities exist for all students.


Prior learning and other requirements
There are no formal prior learning or other requirements for these qualifications.
Students who would benefit most from studying these qualifications are likely to have a
qualification in a numerate subject such as an International GCSE in Mathematics. A
qualification in a business-related subject, such as an International GCSE in Business Studies
or Commerce would be an advantage, but is not necessary.


Progression
Students can progress from these qualifications to:
• higher education courses such as business management, business administration,
  accountancy and finance, human resource management, marketing, retail management,
  tourism management, international business
• a wide range of careers, ranging from banking, sales, product management and general
  management to working in public sector organisations and charities.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business –             45
Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
46   Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business
     – Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
Appendices

        Appendix 1: Codes                                                        48
        Appendix 2: Pearson World Class Qualification design principles          49
        Appendix 3: Transferable skills                                          51
        Appendix 4: Level 3 Extended Project qualification                       52
        Appendix 5: Glossary                                                     55
        Appendix 6: Command words                                                56
        Appendix 7: Quantitative skills                                          57
        Appendix 8: Glossary of International Accounting Standards               58
        Appendix 9: Financial statements and accounting ratios                   60
        Appendix 10: Use of calculators                                          61




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business –   47
Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
Appendix 1: Codes

Type of code    Use of code                                    Code
Unit codes      Each unit is assigned a code. This unit        Unit 1: WBS11/01
                code is used as an entry code to
                                                               Unit 2: WBS12/01
                indicate that a student wishes to take
                the assessment for that unit. Centres          Unit 3: WBS13/01
                will need to use the unit codes only           Unit 4: WBS14/01
                when entering students for their
                examination.
Cash-in codes   The cash-in code is used as a code to          International Advanced
                aggregate the student’s unit scores to         Subsidiary – XBS11
                obtain the overall grade for the
                                                               International Advanced
                qualification.
                                                               Level – YBS11




48                       Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business
                         – Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
Appendix 2: Pearson World Class Qualification
design principles
Pearson’s World Class Qualification design principles mean that all Edexcel qualifications are
developed to be rigorous, demanding, inclusive and empowering.




We work collaboratively to gain approval from an external panel of educational
thought-leaders and assessment experts from across the globe. This is to ensure that
Edexcel qualifications are globally relevant, represent world-class best practice in
qualification and assessment design, maintain a consistent standard and support learner
progression in today’s fast-changing world.
Pearson’s Expert Panel for World-Class Qualifications is chaired by Sir Michael Barber, a
leading authority on education systems and reform. He is joined by a wide range of key
influencers with expertise in education and employability.
“I’m excited to be in a position to work with the global leaders in curriculum and assessment
to take a fresh look at what young people need to know and be able to do in the 21st
century, and to consider how we can give them the opportunity to access that sort of
education.” Sir Michael Barber.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business –              49
Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
Endorsement from Pearson’s Expert Panel for World Class
Qualifications for the International Advanced Subsidiary
(IAS)/International Advanced Level (IAL) development process
December 2015
“We were chosen, either because of our expertise in the UK education system, or because of
our experience in reforming qualifications in other systems around the world as diverse as
Singapore, Hong Kong, Australia and a number of countries across Europe.
We have guided Pearson through what we judge to be a rigorous world class qualification
development process that has included, where appropriate:
• extensive international comparability of subject content against the highest-performing
  jurisdictions in the world
• benchmarking assessments against UK and overseas providers to ensure that they are at
  the right level of demand
• establishing External Subject Advisory Groups, drawing on independent subject-specific
  expertise to challenge and validate our qualifications.
Importantly, we have worked to ensure that the content and learning is future oriented, and
that the design has been guided by Pearson’s Efficacy Framework. This is a structured,
evidenced process which means that learner outcomes have been at the heart of this
development throughout.
We understand that ultimately it is excellent teaching that is the key factor to a learner’s
success in education but as a result of our work as a panel we are confident that we have
supported the development of Edexcel IAS and IAL qualifications that are outstanding for
their coherence, thoroughness and attention to detail and can be regarded as representing
world-class best practice.”


Sir Michael Barber (Chair)                           Professor Lee Sing Kong
Chief Education Advisor, Pearson plc                 Dean and Managing Director, National
                                                     Institute of Education International,
                                                     Singapore
Dr Peter Hill                                        Bahram Bekhradnia
Former Chief Executive ACARA                         President, Higher Education Policy Institute
Professor Jonathan Osborne                           Dame Sally Coates
Stanford University                                  Director of Academies (South), United
                                                     Learning Trust
Professor Dr Ursula Renold                           Professor Bob Schwartz
Federal Institute of Technology, Switzerland         Harvard Graduate School of Education
Professor Janice Kay                                 Jane Beine
Provost, University of Exeter                        Head of Partner Development, John Lewis
                                                     Partnership
Jason Holt
CEO, Holts Group


All titles correct as at December 2015.




50                              Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business
                                – Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
Appendix 3: Transferable skills

The need for transferable skills
In recent years, higher-education institutions and employers have consistently flagged the
need for students to develop a range of transferable skills to enable them to respond with
confidence to the demands of undergraduate study and the world of work.
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines skills, or
competencies, as ‘the bundle of knowledge, attributes and capacities that can be learned
and that enable individuals to successfully and consistently perform an activity or task and
can be built upon and extended through learning.’[1]
To support the design of our qualifications, the Pearson Research Team selected and
evaluated seven global 21st-century skills frameworks. Following on from this process, we
identified the National Research Council’s (NRC) framework [ 2] as the most evidence-based
and robust skills framework, and have used this as a basis for our adapted skills framework.
The framework includes cognitive, intrapersonal skills and interpersonal skills.




The skills have been interpreted for this specification to ensure they are appropriate for the
subject. All of the skills listed are evident or accessible in the teaching, learning and/or
assessment of the qualifications. Some skills are directly assessed. Pearson materials will
support you in identifying these skills and developing these skills in students.
The table overleaf sets out the framework and gives an indication of the skills that can be
found in business and indicates the interpretation of the skill in this area. A full subject
interpretation of each skill, with mapping to show opportunities for student development is
given on the subject pages of our website: qualifications.pearson.com




1
 OECD – Better Skills, Better Jobs, Better Lives (OECD Publishing, 2012)
2
 Koenig J A, National Research Council – Assessing 21st Century Skills: Summary of a Workshop (National
Academies Press, 2011)

Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business –                            51
Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
                        Cognitive           •   Critical thinking
                        processes and
                        strategies          •   Problem solving




 Cognitive skills
                                            •   Analysis
                                                                                              Examining evidence, such as
                                            •   Reasoning/argumentation                       information about a business.
                                                                                              Interpret data to understand the
                                            •   Interpretation
                                                                                              meaning of that data.
                                            •   Decision making

                                            •   Adaptive learning
                                            •   Executive function

                        Creativity          •   Creativity
                                            •   Innovation

                        Intellectual        •   Adaptability
                        openness
                                            •   Personal and social responsibility
                                            •   Continuous learning




 Intrapersonal skills
                                            •   Intellectual interest and curiosity

                        Work ethic/         •   Initiative
                        conscientiousness
                                            •   Self-direction                                Ability and willingness to act
                                                                                              without being told to do so. Using
                                            •   Responsibility                                business knowledge,
                                            •   Perseverance                                  independently, to further own
                                                                                              understanding. Looking at real
                                            •   Productivity                                  world stories in newspapers, on
                                                                                              news and online.
                                            •   Self-regulation (metacognition,
                                                forethought, reflection)
                                            •   Ethics

                                            •   Integrity

                        Positive core       •   Self-monitoring/self-
                        self-evaluation         evaluation/self-reinforcement

                        Teamwork and        •   Communication




 Interpersonal skills
                        collaboration
                                            •   Collaboration
                                            •   Teamwork
                                            •   Cooperation                                   Dialogue between two or more
                                                                                              people to reach a beneficial
                                            •   Empathy/perspective taking
                                                                                              outcome where a conflict exists.
                                            •   Negotiation                                   Working within a team negotiate
                                                                                              the aspects of an issue that
                        Leadership          •   Responsibility                                affects business each person will
                                            •   Assertive communication                       research or present on.

                                            •   Self-presentation




52                                              Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business
                                                – Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
Appendix 4: Level 3 Extended Project qualification

What is the Extended Project?
The Extended Project is a standalone qualification that can be taken alongside International
Advanced Level (IAL) qualifications.
It supports the development of independent learning skills and helps to prepare students for
their next step – whether that be higher education or employment. The qualification:
• is recognised by higher education for the skills it develops
• is worth half of an International Advanced Level (IAL) qualification at grades A*–E
• carries UCAS points for university entry.
The Extended Project encourages students to develop skills in the following areas: research,
critical thinking, extended writing and project management. Students identify and agree a
topic area of their choice for in-depth study (which may or may not be related to an IAL
subject they are already studying), guided by their teacher.
Students can choose from one of four approaches to produce:
• a dissertation (for example an investigation based on predominately secondary research)
• an investigation/field study (for example a practical experiment)
• a performance (for example in music, drama or sport)
• an artefact (for example creating a sculpture in response to a client brief or solving an
  engineering problem).
The qualification is non-examination assessment based and students are assessed on the
skills of managing, planning and evaluating their project. Students will research their topic,
develop skills to review and evaluate the information, and then present the final outcome of
their project.
The Extended Project has 120 guided learning hours (GLH) consisting of a 40-GLH taught
element that includes teaching the technical skills (for example research skills) and an
80-GLH guided element that includes mentoring students through the project work. The
qualification is 100% internally assessed and externally moderated.

How to link the Extended Project with business
The Extended Project creates the opportunity to develop transferable skills for progression to
higher education and to the workplace through the exploration of either an area of personal
interest or a topic of interest from within the business qualification content.
Through the Extended Project, students will develop skills that support their study of
business, including:
• conducting, organising and using research
• independent reading in the subject area
• planning, project management and time management
• defining a hypothesis to be tested in investigations or developing a design brief
• collecting, handling and interpreting data and evidence
• evaluating arguments and processes, including arguments in favour of alternative
  interpretations of data and evaluation of experimental methodology
• critical thinking.



Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business –                53
Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
In the context of the Extended Project, critical thinking refers to the ability to identify and
develop arguments for a point of view or hypothesis and to consider and respond to
alternative arguments. This supports the development of evaluative skills, through
evaluating business arguments and using qualitative and quantitative evidence to support
informed judgements and propose evidence-based solutions to business issues.

Types of Extended Project related to business
Students may produce a dissertation on any topic that can be researched and argued,
for example a controversial business issue such as child labour, executive pay, advertising
to children.
A dissertation might involve an investigation such as:
• the impact of digital downloads on the music industry
• the ease of doing business in a chosen country.
The dissertation uses secondary research sources to provide a reasoned defence or a point
of view, with consideration of counter-arguments.
An alternative might be an investigative project or field study involving the collection of data
from primary research, for example:
• a study of the impact of unemployment on the local community
• a statistical survey of changing social attitudes towards online purchasing.
A field study might consider an issue that lends itself to primary research, for example an
investigation into the motivation techniques used in a chosen business.

Using the Extended Project to support breadth and depth
In the Extended Project, students are assessed on the quality of the work they produce and
the skills they develop and demonstrate through completing this work. Students should
demonstrate that they have extended themselves in some significant way beyond what they
have been studying in business. Students can demonstrate extension in one or more
dimensions:
• deepening understanding – where a student explores a topic in greater depth than in
  the specification content
• broadening skills – where a student learns a new skill. This might be learning how to
  design a website or a new statistical technique that can be used in the analysis of either
  primary or secondary data collected by the student
• widening perspectives – where the student’s project spans different subjects.
  A student studying business with geography may wish to research the impact of tourism
  on a particular region or locality. A student studying business with mathematics may wish
  to use statistical techniques to analyse market data and research one aspect of a market
  in more detail.
A wide range of information to support the delivery and assessment of the Extended Project,
including the specification, teacher guidance for all aspects, an editable scheme of work and
exemplars for all four approaches, can be found on our website.




54                             Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business
                               – Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
Appendix 5: Glossary

Term                               Definition
Assessment objectives              The requirements that students need to meet to succeed in
                                   the qualification. Each assessment objective has a unique
                                   focus, which is then targeted in examinations or coursework.
                                   Assessment objectives may be assessed individually or in
                                   combination.
External assessment                An examination that is held at the same time and place in a
                                   global region.
International Advanced             Abbreviated to IAS.
Subsidiary
International Advanced             Abbreviated to IAL.
Level
International A2 (IA2)             The additional content required for an IAL.
Linear                             Linear qualifications have all assessments at the end of a
                                   course of study. It is not possible to take one assessment
                                   earlier in the course of study.
Modular                            Modular qualifications contain units of assessment.
                                   These units can be taken during the course of study.
                                   The final qualification grade is worked out from the
                                   combined unit results.
Raw marks                          Raw marks are the actual marks that students achieve when
                                   taking an assessment. When calculating an overall grade,
                                   raw marks often need to be converted so that it is possible
                                   to see the proportionate achievement of a student across all
                                   units of study.
Uniform Mark Scale (UMS)           Student actual marks (or raw marks) will be converted into
                                   a UMS mark so that it is possible to see the proportionate
                                   result of a student. Two units may each be worth 25% of a
                                   total qualification. The raw marks for each unit may differ,
                                   but the uniform mark will be the same.
Unit                               A modular qualification will be divided into a number of
                                   units. Each unit will have its own assessment.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business –                    55
Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
Appendix 6: Command words
The table below lists the command words that will be used in the question papers along with
an outline of what each type of question requires students to do.



Command              Number of        What students are required to do
                     marks
Define               2                Requires students to define a term or phrase.
Calculate            4                Requires students to perform a calculation, based on
                                      given data. Calculators may be used and workings
                                      should be given.
Construct            4                Requires students to draw an accurately labelled
                                      diagram. Students may be required to decide on a
                                      type of diagram, or the type required may be stated.
Explain              4                Requires students to provide a brief explanation of
                                      cause or effect, which is supported by details or
                                      example(s).
Analyse              6                Requires a brief chain of reasoning, explanation
                                      and/or justification. If applied to given diagrams or
                                      data, it will include interpretation. Does not include
                                      evaluation.
Discuss              8                Requires a logical chains of reasoning, in context,
                                      showing cause(s) and/or effect(s). A brief assessment
                                      is required showing an awareness of competing
                                      arguments/factors.
Assess               10               Requires a coherent and logical chain of reasoning,
                     [Units 1/2]      showing cause(s) and/or effect(s) which is well
                                      contextualised. Assessment is balanced and wide
                     12
                                      ranging showing an awareness of competing
                     [Units 3/4]
                                      arguments/factors, leading to a supported
                                      judgement.
Evaluate             20               Requires fully developed, coherent and logical chains
                                      of reasoning, showing a range of cause and/or
                                      effect(s). A full awareness of the validity and
                                      significance of competing arguments/factors leading
                                      to a perceptive conclusion that proposes a solution
                                      and/or recommendations.




56                           Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business
                             – Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
Appendix 7: Quantitative skills
Throughout the course of study, students will develop competence in the quantitative skills
listed below. There are opportunities for students to develop these skills throughout the
content and they are required to apply the skills to relevant economic contexts.
The assessment of quantitative skills will constitute a minimum of 10% of the overall marks
for both the International Advanced Subsidiary and the International Advanced Level.


IAS                                                     IA2
QS1 Calculate, use and understand ratios,               QS1 Calculate, use and understand ratios,
averages and fractions                                  averages and fractions

QS2 Calculate, use and understand percentages           QS2 Calculate, use and understand percentages
and percentage changes                                  and percentage changes

QS3 Construct and interpret a range of standard         QS3 Construct and interpret a range of standard
graphical forms                                         graphical forms

QS4 Interpret index numbers                             QS4 Interpret index numbers

QS5 Calculate cost, revenue, profit and                 QS5 Calculate cost, revenue, profit and
break-even                                              break-even

-                                                       QS6 Calculate investment appraisal outcomes
                                                        and interpret results

QS7 Interpret values of price and income                QS7 Interpret values of price and income
elasticity of demand                                    elasticity of demand

QS8 Use and interpret quantitative and non-             QS8 Use and interpret quantitative and non-
quantitative information in order to make               quantitative information in order to make
decisions                                               decisions

QS9 Interpret, apply and analyse information in         QS9 Interpret, apply and analyse information in
written, graphical and numerical forms                  written, graphical and numerical forms




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business –                            57
Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
Appendix 8: Glossary of International
Accounting Standards
Below is a comparison between the International Accounting Standards and the UK GAAP
(Generally Accepted Accounting Practice in the UK) terminology.
The assessments will use the International Accounting Standards terminology.


UK GAAP terminology                              International Accounting Standards
Final accounts                                   Financial statements


Trading and profit and loss account              Statement of comprehensive income

Sales                                            Revenue

Purchases                                        Raw materials/ordinary goods purchased

Cost of goods sold                               Cost of sales

Stock                                            Inventory

Work in progress                                 Work in progress

Gross profit                                     Gross profit

Sundry expenses                                  Other operating expenses

Sundry income                                    Other operating income

Interest receivable                              Investment revenues/finance income

Interest payable                                 Finance costs

Net profit                                       Profit for the year



Balance sheet                                    Statement of financial position


Fixed assets                                     Non-current assets

Land and buildings                               Property

Plant and equipment                              Plant and equipment

Investments                                      Investment property

Goodwill etc.                                    Intangible assets



Current assets                                   Current assets

Stock                                            Inventory

Stock take                                       Inventory count

Debtors                                          Trade receivables

Prepayments                                      Other receivables

Bank and cash                                    Cash




58                          Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business
                            – Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
Current liabilities/creditors: amounts                  Current liabilities
due within 12 months

Creditors                                               Trade payables

Accruals                                                Other payables

Loans repayable within 12 months                        Bank overdraft and loans



Long-term liabilities/creditors:                        Non-current liabilities
amounts falling due after 12 months

Loans repayable after 12 months                         Bank (and other) loans

Net book value                                          Carry over



Capital                                                 Capital or equity

Share capital                                           Share capital




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business –     59
Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
Appendix 9: Financial statements and
accounting ratios
Students will need to learn the key components of the financial statements and their
associated accounting ratios below.


Statement of                           Ratio name                 Ratio formula
comprehensive income
     revenue
                                                                    gross profit
− cost of sales                        gross profit margin          _________         × 100 %
                                                                    revenue
= gross profit

− other operating expenses                                          operating profit
                                       operating profit             ____________ × 100 %
= operating profit                     margin
                                                                    revenue

− interest                                                          profit for the year
                                       profit for the year          ______________        × 100 %
= profit for the year                  (net profit) margin
   (net profit)                                                     revenue



Statement of financial                 Ratio name                 Ratio formula
position
    non-current assets                                              current assets
                                       current ratio                ____________
+ current assets
                                                                    current liabilities
− current liabilities

− non-current liabilities                                           current assets − inventory
                                       acid test ratio (liquid      ____________________
= net assets                           capital ratio)
                                                                   current liabilities

    share capital                      capital employed             non-current liabilities + total equity

+ retained profits
                                                                    non-current liabilities
= total equity                         gearing ratio                _____________           × 100 %
                                                                   capital employed



                                       Ratio name                 Ratio formula

                                                                    operating profit 3
                                       return on capital            _____________          × 100 %
                                       employed
                                                                    capital employed 4




3
    From statement of comprehensive income
4
    From statement of financial position

60                                  Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business
                                    – Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
Appendix 10: Use of calculators
Students may use a calculator in assessments for these qualifications. Centres are
responsible for making sure that calculators used by their students meet the requirements
given in the table below.
Students must be familiar with the requirements before their assessments for these
qualifications.


Calculators must be:                                                     Calculators must not:
• of a size suitable for use on the desk                                 • be designed or adapted to offer any of
                                                                           these facilities:
• either battery or solar powered
                                                                             o language translators
• free of lids, cases and covers which
  have printed instructions or formulas.                                     o symbolic algebra manipulation
The student is responsible for the                                           o symbolic differentiation or integration
following:
                                                                             o communication with other machines or
• the calculator’s power supply                                                the internet.
• the calculator’s working condition                                     • be borrowed from another student during
                                                                           an examination for any reason*
• clearing anything stored in the
  calculator.                                                            • have retrievable information stored in
                                                                           them – this includes:
                                                                             o databanks
                                                                             o dictionaries
                                                                             o mathematical formulas
                                                                             o text.
*An invigilator may give a student a calculator.


Further information can be found in the JCQ documents Instructions for conducting
examinations and Information for candidates for written examinations, available at
www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office.




Sb070917Z:\LT\PD\IALS 2018\9781446912478_IAL_BUSINESS\9781446949573_IAL_BUSINESS.DOCX.1–64/1


Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Business –                                           61
Specification – Issue 1 – September 2017 © Pearson Education Limited 2017
FOR INFORMATION ABOUT EDEXCEL, BTEC OR LCCI QUALIFICATIONS
VISIT QUALIFICATIONS.PEARSON.COM

EDEXCEL IS A REGISTERED TRADEMARK OF PEARSON EDUCATION LIMITED

PEARSON EDUCATION LIMITED. REGISTERED IN ENGLAND AND WALES NO. 872828
REGISTERED OFFICE: 80 STRAND, LONDON WC2R 0RL
VAT REG NO GB 278 537121

GETTY IMAGES: ALEX BELMONLINSKY
