INTERNATIONAL ADVANCED LEVEL


ECONOMICS
 EDEXCEL INTERNATIONAL GCSE

ECONOMICS
SPECIFICATION
SPECIFICATION
  Edexcel International GCSE in Economics (9-1) (4ET0)
Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary in Economics (XEC11)
  First examination June
Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Level in Economics (YEC11)
First teaching September 2018
First examination from January 2019
First certification from August 2019 (International Advanced Subsidiary) and August 2020
(International Advanced Level)
Issue 2
Edexcel, BTEC and LCCI qualifications
Edexcel, BTEC and LCCI qualifications are awarded by Pearson, the UK’s largest awarding
body offering academic and vocational qualifications that are globally recognised and
benchmarked. For further information, please visit our qualification website at
qualifications.pearson.com. Alternatively, you can get in touch with us using the details on
our contact us page at qualifications.pearson.com/contactus

About Pearson
Pearson is the world's leading learning company, with 35,000 employees in more than
70 countries working to help people of all ages to make measurable progress in their lives
through learning. We put the learner at the centre of everything we do, because wherever
learning flourishes, so do people. Find out more about how we can help you and your
learners at qualifications.pearson.com




Acknowledgements
This specification has been produced by Pearson on the basis of consultation with teachers,
examiners, consultants and other interested parties. Pearson would like to thank all those
who contributed their time and expertise to the specification’s development.




References to third party material made in this specification are made in good faith. Pearson
does not endorse, approve or accept responsibility for the content of materials, which may
be subject to change, or any opinions expressed therein. (Material may include textbooks,
journals, magazines and other publications and websites.)


All information in this specification is correct at time of going to publication.


ISBN 978 1 446 94954 2
All the material in this publication is copyright
© Pearson Education Limited 2018
Summary of International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced
Level Economics specification Issue 2 changes

 Summary of changes made between previous issue and this                    Page
 current issue                                                              number
 Content overview for Unit 3 has been changed from ‘Measures of economic    10, 32
 performance’ into ‘Types and sizes of businesses’.
 The title of Appendix 6 has been amended.                                  68
 Quantitative skill 6 ‘Calculate total revenue` has been added to the IAS   69
 table in Appendix 7.


If you need further information on these changes or what they mean, contact us via our
website at: qualifications.pearson.com/en/support/contact-us.html.
Contents

About this specification                                               2
    Why choose Edexcel qualifications?                                 4
    Why choose Pearson Edexcel International Advanced
    Subsidiary/Advanced Level qualifications in Economics              5
    Qualification at a glance                                          8

Economics content                                                     11
    Unit 1: Markets in action                                         12
    Unit 2: Macroeconomic performance and policy                      22
    Unit 3: Business behaviour                                        31
    Unit 4: Developments in the global economy                        39

Assessment information                                                50
Administration and general information                                53
    Entries and resitting of units                                    53
    Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments, special
    consideration and malpractice                                     53
    Awarding and reporting                                            55
    Student recruitment and progression                               57

Appendices                                                            59
    Appendix 1: Codes                                                 60
    Appendix 2: Pearson World Class Qualification design principles   61
    Appendix 3: Transferable skills                                   63
    Appendix 4: Level 3 Extended Project qualification                65
    Appendix 5: Glossary                                              67
    Appendix 6: Command word taxonomy                                 68
    Appendix 7: Quantitative skills                                   69
    Appendix 8: Use of calculators                                    70
About this specification

The Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary in Economics and the Pearson
Edexcel International Advanced Level in Economics are part of a suite of International
Advanced Level qualifications offered by Pearson.
These qualifications are not accredited or regulated by any UK regulatory body.


Key features
This specification includes the following key features.

Structure
The Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary in Economics and the Pearson
Edexcel International Advanced Level in Economics are modular qualifications.
The Advanced Subsidiary can be claimed on completion of the International Advanced
Subsidiary (IAS) units.
The International Advanced Level can be claimed on completion of all the units
(IAS and IA2 units).

Content
These qualifications build on the content covered in the legacy (2013) Pearson Edexcel
International Advanced Level in Economics. They have been updated to align them with
recent changes in the equivalent AS and A Level qualifications taken in England and Wales.

Assessment
The qualifications are assessed through examination only.


Specification updates
This specification is Issue 2 and is valid for first teaching from September 2018. If there are
any significant changes to the specification, we will inform centres in writing. Changes will
also be posted on our website.
For more information please visit qualifications.pearson.com




2                          Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –
                                      Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
Using this specification
This specification gives teachers guidance and encourages effective delivery of these
qualifications. The following information will help you get the most out of the content and
guidance.
Compulsory content: as a minimum, all the bullet points in the content must be taught.
The word ‘including’ in content specifies the detail of what must be covered.
Assessments: teachers should deliver these qualifications using a good range of examples
to support the assessment of the content.
Depth and breadth of content: teachers should use the full range of content and all the
assessment objectives given in the subject content section.


Qualification aims and objectives
The aims and objectives of these qualifications are to enable students to:
• develop an interest in, and enthusiasm for, the subject
• appreciate the contribution of economics to the understanding of the wider economic and
  social environment
• develop an understanding of a range of concepts and an ability to use those concepts in a
  variety of different contexts
• use an enquiring, critical and thoughtful approach to the study of economics and develop
  an ability to think as an economist
• understand that economic behaviour can be studied from a range of perspectives
• develop analytical and quantitative skills, together with qualities and attitudes that will
  equip them for the challenges, opportunities and responsibilities of adult and working life.


Qualification abbreviations used in this specification
The following abbreviations appear in this specification:
• International Advanced Subsidiary – IAS
• International A2 – IA2 (the additional content required for an IAL)
• International Advanced Level – IAL.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –               3
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
Why choose Edexcel qualifications?
Pearson – the world’s largest education company
Edexcel academic qualifications are from Pearson, the UK’s largest awarding organisation.
With over 3.4 million students studying our academic and vocational qualifications
worldwide, we offer internationally recognised qualifications to schools, colleges and
employers globally.
Pearson is recognised as the world’s largest education company, allowing us to drive
innovation and provide comprehensive support for Edexcel students to acquire the
knowledge and skills they need for progression in study, work and life.

A heritage you can trust
The background to Pearson becoming the UK’s largest awarding organisation began in 1836,
when a royal charter gave the University of London its first powers to conduct exams and
confer degrees on its students. With over 150 years of international education experience,
Edexcel qualifications have a firm academic foundation, built on the traditions and rigour
associated with Britain’s educational system.
To find out more about our Edexcel heritage please visit our website:
qualifications.pearson.com/en/about-us/about-pearson/our-history

Results you can trust
Pearson’s leading online marking technology has been shown to produce exceptionally
reliable results, demonstrating that at every stage, Edexcel qualifications maintain the
highest standards.

Developed to Pearson’s world-class qualifications standards
Pearson’s world-class standards mean that all Edexcel qualifications are developed to be
rigorous, demanding, inclusive and empowering. We work collaboratively with a panel of
educational thought-leaders and assessment experts to ensure that Edexcel qualifications
are globally relevant, represent world-class best practice and maintain a consistent
standard.
For more information on the world-class qualification process and principles please go to
Appendix 2: Pearson World Class Qualification design principles or visit our website:
uk.pearson.com/world-class-qualifications.




4                          Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –
                                      Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
Why choose Pearson Edexcel International
Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level qualifications
in Economics
We have listened to feedback from all parts of the international school subject community,
including a large number of teachers. We have made changes that will engage international
learners and give them skills that will support their progression to further study of
Economics and to a wide range of other subjects.
Key qualification features:
• Development of quantitative skills – students develop these skills throughout the
  content of the course and are required to apply these skills to relevant economic contexts
  within the assessment.
• Consistent command word taxonomy – we have reduced the number of command
  words used in the assessment and applied a consistent mark tariff.
• Clear and simple structure - based on your feedback we have taken the opportunity to
  make some improvements to the clarity and structure of our new specification.
• Accessible assessment – to ensure all students are able to access the whole exam
  paper we have introduced ramping within each question. Questions start with a low mark
  tariff and become more challenging as students work their way through the paper,
  helping to build confidence.
• Engaging content – Content allows students to develop an awareness of trends in the
  global economy, researching developed and developing economics, including a focus on
  contemporary issues.
• Clear and straightforward question papers – our question papers are clear and
  accessible for students of all ability ranges. Our mark schemes are straightforward so that
  the assessment requirements are clear.
• Increased level of support – textbook, online digital resources, mapping documents,
  scheme of work, getting started guide and training.
Broad and deep development of learners’ skills – we designed the International
Advanced Level qualifications to extend learners’ knowledge by broadening and deepening
skills, for example learners will:
• read sources to interpret and evaluate economic information
• write extended responses
• respond appropriately to a range of question types, including multiple-choice,
  short-answer, data response and open-ended questions
• develop an understanding of economic concepts and apply these concepts to real-life
  situations.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –              5
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
Progression – International Advanced Level qualifications enable successful progression on
to further study and the workplace. Through our world-class qualification development
process we have consulted with higher education representatives to validate the
appropriateness of these qualifications, including content, skills and assessment structure.
Related qualifications – Our International Advanced Level in Economics sits within our
wider subject offer for Business and Economics qualifications. We also offer:
• Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Level in Business
• Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Level in Accounting
• Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced Subsidiary GCE in Business
• Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Business
• Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced Subsidiary GCE in Economics A
• Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Economics A
• Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced Subsidiary GCE in Economics B
• Pearson Edexcel Level 3 Advanced GCE in Economics B
• BTEC Nationals and Higher Nationals in Business.
More information can be found on our website (qualifications.pearson.com) on the Edexcel
International Advanced Level pages.




6                         Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –
                                     Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
Supporting you in planning and implementing
these qualifications
Planning
• Our Getting Started Guide gives you an overview of the Pearson Edexcel International
  Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics to help you understand the changes to
  content and assessment, and what these changes mean for you and your students.
• We will provide you with an editable course planner and scheme of work.
• Our mapping documents highlight key differences from the legacy qualification.

Teaching and learning
• Our skills maps will highlight opportunities for students to develop skills that are
  assessed, as well as skills that are not directly assessed.
• Print and digital learning and teaching resources – promote any time, any place learning
  to improve student motivation and encourage new ways of working.

Preparing for exams
We will also provide a range of resources to help you prepare your students for the
assessments, including:
• examiner commentaries following each examination series.

ResultsPlus
ResultsPlus provides the most detailed analysis available of your students’ examination
performance. It can help you identify the topics and skills where further learning would
benefit your students.

examWizard
A free online resource designed to support students and teachers with examination
preparation and assessment.

Training events
In addition to online training, we host a series of training events each year for teachers to
deepen their understanding of our qualifications.

Get help and support
Our subject advisor service will ensure that you receive help and guidance from us. You can
sign up to receive qualification updates and product service news at
qualifications.pearson.com or email ‘sign me up’ to TeachingEconomics@pearson.com.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –                 7
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
Qualification at a glance

Qualification overview

Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary in Economics
This qualification consists of two externally-examined units.
The International Advanced Subsidiary is the first half of the International Advanced Level
qualification and consists of two IAS units, Units 1 and 2. This qualification may be awarded
as a discrete qualification or may contribute 50 per cent towards the International Advanced
Level qualification.

Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Level in Economics
This qualification consists of four externally-examined units.
The International Advanced Level consists of the two IAS units (Units 1 and 2) plus two IA2
units (Units 3 and 4). Students wishing to take the International Advanced Level must,
therefore, complete all four units.


Course of study
The structure of these qualifications allows teachers to construct a course of study that can
be taught and assessed as either:
• distinct modules of teaching and learning with related units of assessment taken at
  appropriate stages during the course; or
• a linear course assessed in its entirety at the end.




8                          Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –
                                      Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
Content and assessment overview
 IAS                                                                              *Unit code:
                                                                                  WEC11/01
 Unit 1: Markets in action
 Externally assessed                                                              50% of      25% of
 Written examination: 1 hour and 45 minutes                                       the total   the total
                                                                                  IAS         IAL
 Availability: January, June and October
 First assessment: January 2019
 80 marks
 Content overview
 • Introductory concepts
 • Consumer behaviour and demand
 • Supply
 • Price determination
 • Market failure
 • Government intervention in markets
 Assessment overview
 Section A: Six multiple-choice questions (6 marks).
 Section B: Five short-answer questions (20 marks).
 Section C: A five-part question, based on data provided in a source booklet (34 marks).
 Section D: One 20-mark essay question from a choice of two (20 marks).


 IAS                                                                              *Unit code:
                                                                                  WEC12/01
 Unit 2: Macroeconomic performance and policy
 Externally assessed                                                              50% of      25% of
 Written examination: 1 hour and 45 minutes                                       the total   the total
                                                                                  IAS         IAL
 Availability: January, June and October
 First assessment: June 2019
 80 marks
 Content overview
 • Measures of economic performance
 • Aggregate demand (AD)
 • Aggregate supply (AS)
 • National income
 • Economic growth
 • Macroeconomic objectives and policies
 Assessment overview
 Section A: Six multiple-choice questions (6 marks).
 Section B: Five short-answer questions (20 marks).
 Section C: A five-part question, based on data provided in a source booklet (34 marks).
 Section D: One 20-mark essay question from a choice of two (20 marks).



Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –                           9
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
 IA2                                                                           *Unit code:
                                                                               WEC13/01
 Unit 3: Business behaviour
 Externally assessed                                                           50% of        25% of
 Written examination: 2 hours                                                  the total     the total
                                                                               IA2           IAL
 Availability: January, June and October
 First assessment: January 2020
 80 marks
 Content overview
 • Types and sizes of businesses
 • Revenue, costs and profits
 • Market structures and contestability
 • Labour markets
 • Government intervention
 Assessment overview
 Section A: Six multiple-choice questions (6 marks).
 Section B: A five-part question, based on data provided in a source booklet (34 marks).
 Section C: Two 20-mark essay questions from a choice of three (40 marks).


 IA2                                                                           *Unit code:
                                                                               WEC14/01
 Unit 4: Developments in the global economy
 Externally assessed                                                           50% of        25% of
 Written examination: 2 hours                                                  the total     the total
                                                                               IA2           IAL
 Availability: January, June and October
 First assessment: June 2020
 80 marks
 Content overview
 • Causes and effects of globalisation
 • Trade and the global economy
 • Balance of payments, exchange rates and international competitiveness
 • Poverty and inequality
 • The role of the state in the macroeconomy
 • Growth and development in developing, emerging and developed economies
 Assessment overview
 Section A: Six multiple-choice questions (6 marks).
 Section B: A five-part question, based on data provided in a source booklet (34 marks).
 Section C: Two 20-mark essay questions from a choice of three (40 marks).
*See Appendix 1: Codes for a description of this code and all other codes relevant to these
 qualifications.




10                          Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –
                                       Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
Economics content

        Unit 1: Markets in action                                                 12
        Unit 2: Macroeconomic performance and policy                              22
        Unit 3: Business behaviour                                                31
        Unit 4: Developments in the global economy                                39




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –   11
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
Unit 1: Markets in action

IAS compulsory unit

Externally assessed

1.1 Unit description
                 This unit gives students an introduction to the nature of economics
                 and examines how the price mechanism allocates resources in
                 local, national and global markets.
                 Students will learn to apply supply and demand analysis to
                 real-world situations, and will be able to suggest reasons for
                 consumer behaviour. This will involve looking at how consumers
                 act in a rational way to maximise utility and how firms maximise
                 profit but also why consumers may not behave rationally.
                 Students will analyse the nature and causes of market failure and
                 understand the strengths and weaknesses of possible policy
                 remedies.
                 Students will need to be able to apply relevant quantitative skills
                 to the content covered in this unit, including calculations, the use
                 of data and the drawing of diagrams. A full list of quantitative
                 skills can be found in Appendix 7: Quantitative skills.




1.2 Assessment information
                 • First assessment: January 2019.
                 • The examination lasts 1 hour and 45 minutes.
                 • The paper is out of 80 marks.
                 • The paper will include, multiple-choice, short-open response
                   and extended-writing questions. Some of these will relate to
                   sources provided in a Source booklet.
                 • The paper will include questions that target quantitative skills.
                   This may include making and interpreting calculations, and
                   drawing and interpreting diagrams.
                 • Calculators may be used in the examination. See Appendix 8 for
                   more information.




12               Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –
                            Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
1.3 Unit content
1.3.1 Introductory concepts

What students need to learn:
 1 The nature of               a) Economics as a social science: inability to conduct scientific
   economics                      experiments.
                               b) The development of models in economics based on assumptions.
                               c) The use of the ceteris paribus assumption in building models and
                                  drawing conclusions based on them.
 2 Positive and                a) The distinction between positive statements and value
   normative                      judgements on economic issues.
   economics
                               b) The role of value judgements in influencing economic decision
                                  making and policy.
 3 Scarcity                    a) The problem of unlimited wants and finite resources.
                               b) The distinction between renewable and non-renewable
                                  resources.
                               c) The link between scarcity and opportunity cost.
                               d) The distinction between free goods and economic goods.
 4 Production                  a) The use of production possibility frontiers to depict:
   possibility                    •   the maximum productive potential of an economy
   frontiers                      •   efficient or inefficient allocation of resources
                                  •   possible and unobtainable production
                                  •   opportunity cost (using marginal analysis)
                                  •   economic growth and decline.
                               b) The distinction between movements along, and shifts in,
                                  production possibility frontiers, and their possible causes.
                               c) The distinction between capital goods and consumer goods.
                               d) The significance of capital goods for productivity and economic
                                  growth.
 5 Specialisation and          a) The advantages and disadvantages of specialisation and the
   the role of money              division of labour in organising production; Adam Smith’s views
   and financial                  on the division of labour.
   markets
                               b) The function of money as a medium of exchange, a measure and
                                  store of value, and a method of deferred payment; the
                                  significance of these functions for specialisation.
                               c) The role of financial markets:
                                  •   to facilitate saving
                                  •   to make funds available to businesses and individuals
                                  •   to facilitate the exchange of goods and services
                                  •   to provide forward markets in commodities and currencies
                                  •   to provide a market for equities.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –                    13
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
1.3.1 Introductory concepts (continued)

What students need to learn:


 6 Free market,          a) The distinction between free market, mixed and command
   mixed and                economies.
   command
                         b) The advantages and disadvantages of free market and command
   economies
                            economies.
                         c) The role of the state in a mixed economy.




14                       Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –
                                    Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
1.3.2 Consumer behaviour and demand

What students need to learn:

 1 Rational                    a) The assumption of rationality in decision making: consumers aim
   decision making                to maximise utility by making rational choices; firms aim to
                                  maximise profits.
                               b) Reasons why consumers may not aim to maximise utility:
                                  •   the influence of other people’s behaviour (herding)
                                  •   habitual behaviour
                                  •   inertia
                                  •   poor computational skills
                                  •   the need to feel valued
                                  •   framing and bias.
 2 The demand curve            a) The concept of ‘demand’.
                               b) The distinction between movements along a demand curve and
                                  shifts of a demand curve.
                               c) The concept of diminishing marginal utility and its significance
                                  for the shape of the individual demand curve.
                               d) Factors that may cause a shift in the demand curve:
                                  •   changes in the price of substitutes or complementary goods
                                  •   changes in real income
                                  •   changes in tastes
                                  •   changes in size and age distribution of the population
                                  •   advertising.
 3 Price, income and           a) The concepts of ‘price’, ‘income’ and ‘cross-elasticities of
   cross-elasticities             demand’.
   of demand
                               b) How to use formulae to calculate price, income and
                                  cross-elasticities of demand.
                               c) Interpretation of numerical values of price elasticity of demand:
                                  •   perfectly price elastic demand
                                  •   price elastic demand
                                  •   unitary price elastic demand
                                  •   price inelastic demand
                                  •   perfectly price inelastic demand.
                               d) The factors influencing price elasticity of demand:
                                  •   availability of substitutes
                                  •   branding
                                  •   percentage of total expenditure
                                  •   addictiveness of product
                                  •   durability of product.
                               e) How to calculate total revenue.
                               f) How price elasticity of demand varies along a straight line
                                  demand curve.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –                  15
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
1.3.2 Consumer behaviour and demand (continued)

What students need to learn:


 3 Price, income and     g) The relationship between price elasticity of demand and total
   cross-elasticities       revenue.
   of demand
                         h) Interpretation of numerical values of income elasticity of
   (continued)
                            demand:
                           •   perfectly income elastic demand
                           •   income elastic demand
                           •   income inelastic demand
                           •   perfectly income inelastic demand
                           •   the distinction between normal goods and inferior goods.
                         i) Interpretation of numerical values of cross elasticity of demand.
                            Significance for the degree to which goods are:
                           • substitutes
                           • complements
                           • unrelated.
                         j) The significance of price, income and cross-elasticities of demand
                            for firms, consumers and the government.




16                       Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –
                                    Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
1.3.3 Supply

What students need to learn:

 1 The supply curve            a) The concept of ‘supply’.
                               b) The distinction between movements along a supply curve and
                                  shifts of a supply curve.
                               c) Factors that may cause a shift in the supply curve:
                                  •   changes in the costs of production
                                  •   the introduction of new technology
                                  •   indirect taxes (specific and ad valorem)
                                  •   government subsidies
                                  •   natural disasters.
 2 Price elasticity of         a) The concept of ‘price elasticity of supply’.
   supply
                               b) Calculation and interpretation of numerical values of price
                                  elasticity of supply:
                                  •   perfectly elastic supply
                                  •   elastic supply
                                  •   unitary elastic supply
                                  •   inelastic supply
                                  •   perfectly inelastic supply.
                               c) Factors that influence price elasticity of supply:
                                  •   the time period
                                  •   availability of stock/perishability
                                  •   mobility of factors of production
                                  •   legal constraints
                                  •   capacity.
                               d) The distinction between the short run and long run in economics
                                  and its significance for price elasticity of supply.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –                 17
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
1.3.4 Price determination

What students need to learn:

 1 Determination of      a) Equilibrium price and quantity, and how they are determined.
   market
                         b) Causes of changes in the equilibrium price and quantity as a
   equilibrium
                            result of shifts in demand and supply curves.
                         c) The operation of market forces to eliminate excess demand and
                            excess supply.
 2 Consumer and          a) The distinction between consumer and producer surplus.
   producer surplus
                         b) How changes in demand or supply might affect consumer and
                            producer surplus.
 3 Functions of the      a) The rationing, incentive and signalling functions of the price
   price mechanism          mechanism for allocating scarce resources.
                         b) The price mechanism in the context of different types of
                            markets, including local, national and global markets.
 4 Indirect taxes and    a) The impact of indirect taxes on consumers, producers and the
   subsidies                government.
                         b) The incidence of indirect taxes on consumers and producers.
                         c) The impact of subsidies on consumers, producers and the
                            government.
                         d) The incidence of subsidies on consumers and producers.




18                       Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –
                                    Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
1.3.5 Market failure

What students need to learn:

 1 Sources of market           a) Why market failure occurs: too much or too little of a good is
   failure                        produced and/or consumed compared to the socially optimal
                                  level of output.
                               b) Sources of market failure:
                                  •   externalities
                                  •   the free-rider problem; non-provision of public goods
                                  •   imperfect market information
                                  •   moral hazard
                                  •   speculation and market bubbles.
 2 Positive and                a) The distinction between private benefits, external benefits and
   negative                       social benefits.
   externalities
                               b) The distinction between private costs, external costs and social
                                  costs.
                               c) The distinction between:
                                  •   external benefits of production
                                  •   external benefits of consumption
                                  •   external costs of production
                                  •   external costs of consumption.
                               d) The use of diagrams, using marginal analysis, to illustrate:
                                  • the external benefits from consumption
                                  • the external costs from production
                                  • the distinction between the market and social optimum
                                    positions; identification of the welfare loss or gain areas.
                               e) The impact of externalities in various contexts:
                                  •   transport
                                  •   health
                                  •   education
                                  •   environment
                                  •   financial.
 3 Non-provision of            a) The distinction between public and private goods:
   public goods                   • private goods: rival and excludable
                                  • public goods: non-rival and non-excludable.
                               b) Why public goods may not be provided by the private sector
                                  making reference to the free-rider problem.
 4 Imperfect market            a) The distinction between symmetric and asymmetric information.
   information
                               b) The significance of information gaps.
                               c) How imperfect market information may lead to a misallocation of
                                  resources in various contexts:
                                  •   healthcare
                                  •   education
                                  •   pensions
                                  •   insurance.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –                    19
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
1.3.5 Market failure (continued)

What students need to learn:

 5 Moral hazard          a) How moral hazard can occur.
                         b) The impact of moral hazard on consumers, producers, workers
                            and governments in:
                           • insurance
                           • banking.
 6 Speculation and       a) How market bubbles may arise.
   market bubbles
                         b) The impact of market bubbles on consumers, producers, workers
                            and governments in various contexts:
                           • housing
                           • stocks and shares.




20                       Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –
                                    Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
1.3.6 Government intervention in markets

What students need to learn:

 1 Purpose and                 a) The purpose of government intervention, including reference to
   methods of                     market failure.
   government
                               b) Methods of intervention:
   intervention
                                  •   indirect taxation (ad valorem and specific)
                                  •   subsidies
                                  •   maximum and minimum (guaranteed) prices.
                                  •   tradeable pollution permits
                                  •   extension of property rights
                                  •   state provision
                                  •   regulation
                                  •   provision of information.
                               c) Contexts in which governments may intervene:
                                  •   health
                                  •   housing
                                  •   education
                                  •   transport
                                  •   environment
                                  •   energy
                                  •   agriculture
                                  •   commodities.
 2 Government                  a) ‘Government failure’ as intervention that results in a net welfare
   failure                        loss.
                               b) Causes of government failure:
                                  •   information gaps
                                  •   lack of incentives
                                  •   unintended consequences
                                  •   excessive administrative costs
                                  •   moral hazard.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –                  21
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
Unit 2: Macroeconomic performance and policy

IAS compulsory unit

Externally assessed

2.1 Unit description
                 This unit introduces the key measures of economic performance
                 and the main objectives and instruments of economic policy in an
                 international context. Students will learn how to use a basic AD/AS
                 model to analyse changes in real output and the price level.
                 Students will look at when demand and/or supply side policies may
                 be appropriate ways of improving an economy’s performance;
                 consider these policies in an historical context; predict the possible
                 impact of such policies and recognise the assumptions involved.
                 Students should understand different approaches that may be
                 used by policy makers to address macroeconomic problems and to
                 identify criteria for success.
                 Students will need to be able to apply relevant quantitative skills
                 to the content covered introduced in this unit, including
                 calculations, the use of data and the drawing of diagrams. A full
                 list of quantitative skills can be found in Appendix 7: Quantitative
                 skills.




2.2 Assessment information
                 • First assessment: June 2019.
                 • The examination lasts 1 hour and 45 minutes.
                 • The paper is out of 80 marks.
                 • The paper will include multiple-choice, short-open response and
                   extended-writing questions. Some of these will relate to sources
                   provided in a Source booklet.
                 • The paper will include questions that target quantitative skills.
                   This may include making and interpreting calculations, and
                   drawing and interpreting diagrams.
                 • Calculators may be used in the examination. See Appendix 8
                   for more information.




22               Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –
                            Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
2.3 Unit content
2.3.1 Measures of economic performance

What students need to learn:

 1 Economic growth             a) The rate of change of real Gross Domestic Product (GDP) as a
                                  measure of economic growth and living standards.
                               b) Gross National Income (GNI) as an alternative measure of
                                  national income.
                               c) The distinction between the following measures of GDP/GNI:
                                  • real and nominal
                                  • total and per capita
                                  • value and volume.
                               d) Comparison of GDP/GNI rates of growth between countries and
                                  over time.
                               e) The concept of Purchasing Power Parities (PPPs) in making
                                  international comparisons of real GDP/GNI.
                               f) The distinction between positive economic growth rates and
                                  negative economic growth rates.
                               g) The concept of ‘recession’ as two consecutive quarters of
                                  negative economic growth.
                               h) The limitations of using GDP/GNI to compare living standards
                                  between countries and over time.
                               i) National happiness and wellbeing:
                                  • indicators of national happiness and wellbeing
                                  • the relationship between real incomes and subjective
                                    happiness.
 2 Inflation                   a) The concepts of inflation, deflation and disinflation.
                               b) Calculating inflation using a consumer price index (CPI),
                                  including role of weighted basket of goods and services.
                               c) Limitations of the CPI as a measure of the rate of inflation.
                               d) The producer (wholesale) price index as an indicator of future
                                  trends in the rate of inflation.
                               e) Causes of inflation:
                                  • demand-pull
                                  • cost-push
                                  • excessive growth of money supply.
                               f) Causes of deflation:
                                  • falling aggregate demand (AD)
                                  • increase in aggregate supply (AS)
                                  • fall in the money supply.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –                   23
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
2.3.1 Measures of economic performance (continued)

What students need to learn:


 2 Inflation             g) Effects of inflation and deflation on:
   (continued)             •   Consumers
                           •   the government
                           •   firms
                           •   workers
                           •   income distribution
                           •   investment
                           •   competitiveness
                           •   the current account of the balance of payments.
 3 Employment and        a) How unemployment is measured, using the International Labour
   unemployment             Organization (ILO) definition.
                         b) The causes of unemployment:
                           •   frictional
                           •   seasonal
                           •   structural
                           •   demand deficiency
                           •   real wage inflexibility.
                         c) The effects of unemployment on:
                           •   consumers
                           •   firms
                           •   workers
                           •   public finances
                           •   resource utilisation and production possibility frontier
                           •   society.
                         d) The distinction between unemployment and underemployment.
                         e) The significance of changes in rates of employment,
                            unemployment and economic inactivity.
                         f) The significance of net migration for employment and
                            unemployment.
 4 Balance of            a) Components of the balance of payments, with particular
   payments                 reference to the current account.
                         b) The distinction between deficits and surpluses in the trade in
                            goods and services balance.
                         c) The distinction between balance of payments deficits and
                            surpluses on the current account.




24                       Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –
                                    Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
2.3.2 Aggregate demand (AD)

What students need to learn:

 1 The                         a) The concept of AD.
   characteristics
                               b) Components of aggregate demand:
   of AD
                                  • C + I + G + (X−M) =
                                  • the AD curve.
                               c) The distinction between a movement along, and a shift of,
                                  the AD curve.
 2 Consumption (C)             a) Influences on consumption:
                                  •   disposable income
                                  •   interest rates
                                  •   consumer confidence
                                  •   level of welfare payments
                                  •   wealth effects
                                  •   availability of credit.
                               b) The relationship between savings and consumption.
                               c) The definition of the ‘savings ratio’.
                               d) Causes and effects of changes in the savings ratio.
 3 Investment (I)              a) The distinction between gross investment and net investment.
                               b) Influences on investment:
                                  •   the rate of economic growth
                                  •   interest rates
                                  •   business confidence and expectations
                                  •   availability of credit
                                  •   tax on company profits.
                               c) Government policy to promote investment:
                                  • tax relief
                                  • subsidies
                                  • reductions on the rate of corporation tax.
 4 Government                  a) Influences on government expenditure:
   expenditure (G)                •   fiscal policy
                                  •   the level of economic activity
                                  •   correction of market failures
                                  •   political priorities.
 5 Net trade balance           a) The impact on the net trade balance of changes in:
   (X−M)                          •   real income
                                  •   the exchange rate
                                  •   the state of the global economy
                                  •   degree of protectionism
                                  •   non-price factors.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –               25
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
2.3.3 Aggregate supply (AS)

What students need to learn:

 1 The                   a) The concept of AS.
   characteristics
                         b) The AS curve.
   of AS
                         c) The distinction between a movement along and a shift of the
                            AS curve.
 2 Short-run AS          a) Factors influencing SRAS. Changes in:
   (SRAS)                  • costs of raw materials and energy
                           • exchange rates
                           • tax rates.
 3 Long-run AS           a) Different shapes of AS curve:
   (LRAS)                  • Keynesian
                           • classical.
                         b) Factors influencing LRAS. Changes in:
                           •   the state of technology
                           •   productivity
                           •   education and skills
                           •   government regulations and tax
                           •   demography and net migration
                           •   competition policy.




26                       Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –
                                    Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
2.3.4 National income

What students need to learn:

 1 National income             a) The circular flow of income.
                               b) The distinction between income and wealth.
 2 Injections and              a) The distinction between injections and withdrawals.
   withdrawals
                               b) Injections:
                                  • investment
                                  • government expenditure
                                  • exports.
                               c) Withdrawals:
                                  • savings
                                  • taxation
                                  • imports.
                               d) The impact of net injections into, and net withdrawals from, the
                                  circular flow of income.
 3 Equilibrium level           a) The concept of equilibrium level of real national output.
   of real output
                               b) Causes of changes in equilibrium real national output, as a result
                                  of shifts in AD and/or AS curves.
 4 The multiplier              a) The multiplier and multiplier process.
                               b) Marginal propensities and their effects on the multiplier:
                                  •   the marginal propensity to consume (MPC)
                                  •   the marginal propensity to save (MPS)
                                  •   the marginal propensity to tax (MPT)
                                  •   the marginal propensity to import (MPM).
                               c) Calculations of the multiplier using the formula 1/(1-MPC) and
                                  1/MPW, where MPW = MPS + MPT + MPM.
                               d) The significance of the multiplier for shifts in AD and the level of
                                  economic activity.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –                    27
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
2.3.5 Economic growth

What students need to learn:


 1 Causes of growth      a) The distinction between actual and potential growth.
                         b) Actual growth caused by an increase in the components of AD.
                         c) The importance of international trade for export-led growth.
                         d) Causes of potential growth:
                           •   domestic investment and foreign direct investment (FDI)
                           •   innovation
                           •   growth in size of labour force, including net migration
                           •   the degree of competition.
                         e) The importance of productivity for the rate of economic growth.
 2 Benefits of growth    a) Possible benefits of growth:
                           •   higher living standards
                           •   lower unemployment
                           •   increased profits for firms
                           •   higher levels of investment
                           •   increased tax revenues
                           •   improved public services.
 3 Costs of growth       a) Possible costs of growth:
                           •   opportunity costs
                           •   environmental costs
                           •   balance of trade deficits
                           •   increased inequality
                           •   inflation.
 4 Output gaps           a) The difference between actual growth rate and long-term trends
                            in growth.
                         b) The distinction between positive and negative output gaps.
                         c) Characteristics of positive and negative output gaps.
                         d) Difficulties of measuring output gaps.




28                       Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –
                                    Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
2.3.6 Macroeconomic objectives and policies

What students need to learn:

 1 Macroeconomic               a) Economic growth.
   objectives
                               b) Low and stable rate of inflation.
                               c) Low unemployment.
                               d) Balance of payments equilibrium on current account.
                               e) Balanced government budget.
                               f) Greater income equality.
 2 Possible conflicts          a) Inflation and unemployment, including the short-run Phillips
   between                        curve.
   macroeconomic
                               b) Economic growth and protection of the environment.
   objectives
                               c) Inflation and equilibrium on the current account of the balance of
                                  payments.
                               d) Economic growth and income equality.
 3 Macroeconomic               a) Supply-side policies designed to increase productivity,
   supply-side                    competition and incentives.
   policies
                               b) Free market policies:
                                  •   deregulation of product and labour markets
                                  •   privatisation
                                  •   reduction in taxation
                                  •   changing the levels of welfare payments
                                  •   cutting the costs of bureaucracy for firms.
                               c) Interventionist policies:
                                  •   investment in education, training and skills
                                  •   incentives to encourage investment: tax incentive or subsidies
                                  •   infrastructure investment
                                  •   finance for business start-ups
                                  •   regional policy.
                               d) Strengths and weaknesses of different supply-side policies.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –                  29
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
2.3.6 Macroeconomic objectives and policies (continued)

What students need to learn:


 4 Macroeconomic         a) Demand-side policies:
   demand-side             • the distinction between fiscal and monetary policy
   policies                • the distinction between reflationary and deflationary policies.
                         b) Fiscal policy instruments:
                           • government spending and taxation.
                         c) Monetary policy instruments:
                           • interest rates
                           • asset purchases to increase money supply (quantitative
                             easing)
                           • changes in lending criteria
                           • reserve asset (liquidity) requirements.
                         d) The role of central banks in the conduct of monetary policy:
                           •   implementation of monetary policy
                           •   achieving an inflation target
                           •   as banker to the government
                           •   as banker to the banks – lender of last resort.
                         e) Strengths and weaknesses of different demand-side policies.




30                       Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –
                                    Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
Unit 3: Business behaviour

IAL compulsory unit

Externally assessed

3.1 Unit description
                                This unit develops the content of Unit 1 and examines how pricing
                                and the nature of competition between firms is affected by the
                                number and size of market participants. At the end of this unit,
                                students should be able to analyse and evaluate the pricing and
                                output decisions of firms in different contexts, and understand the
                                role of competition in business decision making. They should also
                                be capable of making an appraisal of government intervention
                                aimed at promoting competitive markets.
                                Students will need to be able to apply relevant quantitative skills
                                to the content covered introduced in this unit, including
                                calculations, the use of data and the drawing of diagrams. A full
                                list of quantitative skills can be found in Appendix 7: Quantitative
                                skills.



3.2 Assessment information
                                • First assessment: January 2020.
                                • The examination lasts 2 hours.
                                • The paper is out of 80 marks.
                                • The paper will include multiple-choice, short-open response and
                                  extended-writing questions. Some of these will relate to sources
                                  provided in a Source booklet.
                                • The paper will include questions that target quantitative skills.
                                  This may include making and interpreting calculations, and
                                  drawing and interpreting diagrams.
                                • Questions may draw on any content covered in Units 1
                                  and 2.
                                • Calculators may be used in the examination. See Appendix 8
                                  for more information.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –                   31
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
3.3 Unit content
3.3.1 Types and sizes of businesses

What students need to learn:

 1 Types of business     a) Types of businesses:
                           •   private sector organisations
                           •   state-owned enterprises (public sector)
                           •   for-profit and not-for-profit organisations
                           •   co-operatives
                           •   joint ventures.
 2 Size of businesses    a) The size of businesses:
                           • SMEs (small- and medium-size enterprises)
                           • large corporations.
                         b) How businesses grow:
                           •   organic growth
                           •   merger/takeover:
                           •   forward vertical integration
                           •   backward vertical integration
                           •   horizontal integration
                           •   conglomerate integration.
                         c) Advantages and disadvantages of each type of merger/takeover.
                         d) Constraints on business growth:
                           •   size of market
                           •   access to finance
                           •   owner objectives
                           •   government regulation and bureaucracy.
                         e) Reasons some firms tend to remain small and others grow.
                         f) Impact of growth of firms on businesses, workers and
                            consumers.
                         g) Demergers:
                           • reasons for demergers
                           • impact of demergers on businesses, workers and consumers.
 3 Business              a) Different business objectives:
   objectives              •   profit maximisation
                           •   revenue maximisation
                           •   sales volume maximisation.
                           •   behavioural theories: satisficing.
                         b) The significance of the divorce of ownership from control for
                            business objectives: the principal-agent problem.
                         c) Formulae for different business objectives:
                           • profit maximisation
                           • revenue maximisation
                           • sales volume maximisation.




32                       Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –
                                    Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
3.3.2 Revenue, costs and profits

What students need to learn:

 1 Revenue                     a) Formulae to calculate and understand the relationship between:
                                  • total revenue
                                  • average revenue
                                  • marginal revenue.
                               b) Price elasticity of demand and its relationship to revenue
                                  concepts, including calculations.
 2 Costs                       a) Derivation of short-run cost curves from the assumption of
                                  diminishing marginal productivity.
                               b) The law of diminishing returns.
                               c) Formulae to calculate and understand the relationship between:
                                  •   total cost
                                  •   total fixed cost
                                  •   total variable cost
                                  •   average (total) cost
                                  •   average fixed cost
                                  •   average variable cost
                                  •   marginal cost.
                               d) The relationship between:
                                  •   marginal product and marginal costs
                                  •   average products and average cost
                                  •   total product and total cost
                                  •   short-run and long-run costs.
 3 Economies and               a) The relationship between long-run cost curves and
   diseconomies of                economies/diseconomies of scale.
   scale
                               b) Minimum efficient scale.
                               c) Distinction between internal/external economies of scale.
                               d) Sources of internal economies of scale:
                                  •   financial
                                  •   technical
                                  •   managerial
                                  •   marketing
                                  •   purchasing
                                  •   risk bearing.
                               e) Sources of external economies of scale:
                                  • availability of skilled labour
                                  • access to transport links
                                  • sharing knowledge.
                               f) Sources of diseconomies of scale:
                                  • communication problems
                                  • coordination problems
                                  • X-inefficiency.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –                33
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
3.3.2 Revenue, costs and profits (continued)

What students need to learn:

 4 Profits and losses    a) The distinction between normal profit, supernormal profit and
                            losses.
                         b) Short-run and long-run shutdown points.




34                       Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –
                                    Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
3.3.3 Market structures and contestability

What students need to learn:

 1 Efficiency                a) The concepts of:
                                 •   allocative efficiency
                                 •   productive efficiency
                                 •   dynamic efficiency
                                 •   X-inefficiency
                                 •   efficiency/inefficiency in different market structures.
 2 Concentration             a) Calculation of n-firm concentration ratios.
   ratio
                             b) The significance of concentration ratios.
 3 Perfect                   a) Assumptions of perfect competition.
   competition
                             b) Profit-maximising equilibrium in the short run and long run.
                             c) The short-run shutdown point.
                             d) Productive and allocative efficiency in the short run and long run.
 4 Monopolistic              a) Assumptions of monopolistic competition.
   competition
                             b) Types of product differentiation:
                                 • physical – product features
                                 • marketing – advertising, packaging
                                 • distribution – shop, online, telephone.
                             c) Profit-maximising equilibrium in the short run and long run.
                             d) Productive and allocative efficiency in the short run and long run.
 5 Oligopoly                 a) Assumptions of oligopoly.
                             b) Barriers to entry and exit:
                                 •   economies of scale
                                 •   limit pricing
                                 •   patents
                                 •   branding
                                 •   sunk costs
                                 •   legal.
                             c) Interdependence of firms:
                                 •   simple game theory – two firm/two outcome model
                                 •   reasons for collusive and non-collusive behaviour
                                 •   cartels
                                 •   price leadership
                                 •   price wars.
                             d) Costs and benefits of collusion to producers, consumers, workers
                                and governments.
                             e) Price competition:
                                 • price wars
                                 • predatory pricing
                                 • limit pricing.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –                 35
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
3.3.3 Market structures and contestability (continued)

What students need to learn:


 5 Oligopoly           f) Non-price competition:
   (continued)            •    advertising and branding
                          •    quality
                          •    endorsement
                          •    product placement
                          •    after-sales service.
                       g) Costs and benefits of price and non-price competition to firms,
                          consumers, employees and suppliers.
 6 Monopoly            a) Assumptions of monopoly.
                       b) Barriers to entry and exit.
                       c) Profit-maximising equilibrium.
                       d) Costs and benefits of monopoly to firms and consumers.
                       e) The concept of ‘natural monopoly’ and its implications.
                       f) Conditions necessary for third-degree price discrimination.
                       g) Costs and benefits of price discrimination to firms and consumers.
                       h) Productive, allocative and dynamic efficiency.
 7 Monopsony           a) Assumptions and conditions for a monopsony to operate.
                       b) Costs and benefits of a monopsony to firms, consumers and
                          employees.
 8 Contestability      a) Characteristics of contestable markets.
                       b) Implications of contestable markets for behaviour of firms on:
                          • profitability
                          • pricing decisions (limit pricing).
                       c) Costs and benefits of contestability for firms and consumers.
                       d) The significance of sunk costs for contestability.




36                       Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –
                                    Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
3.3.4 Labour markets

What students need to learn:

 1 The demand for              a) Factors that influence the demand for labour to a particular
   labour                         occupation:
                                  •   demand for the final product (labour as a derived demand)
                                  •   productivity of labour
                                  •   price of the product
                                  •   wage rate relative to price of capital.
                               b) Factors that influence the elasticity of demand for labour.
 2 The supply of               c) Factors that influence the supply of labour to a particular
   labour                         occupation:
                                  •   size of population
                                  •   net migration
                                  •   income tax rates
                                  •   level of welfare benefits
                                  •   government regulations
                                  •   trade unions.
                               d) Factors that influence the elasticity of supply of labour.
 3 The determination           a) Labour market equilibrium.
   of wage rates in
                               b) Causes of changes in the equilibrium wage rate and quantity of
   competitive and
                                  labour as a result of shifts in demand curves and supply curves.
   non-competitive
   markets                     c) Wage setting in the public sector/state-owned enterprises.

 4 Market failure in           a) Causes and consequences of the geographical immobility of
   the labour market              labour.
                               b) Causes and consequences of the occupational immobility of
                                  labour.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –                  37
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
3.3.5 Government intervention

What students need to learn:

 1 Government            a) The case for government intervention.
   intervention in
                         b) Measures to control monopolies and mergers:
   product markets
                           •   price regulation
                           •   profit regulation
                           •   quality standards
                           •   performance targets
                           •   referral to regulatory authorities
                           •   legislation to control mergers and takeovers.
                         c) Measures to promote competition and contestability:
                           • tax incentives and grants to promote small businesses and
                             FDI
                           • deregulation
                           • privatisation
                           • competitive tendering for public sector contracts
                           • trade liberalisation.
                         d) Measures to protect suppliers and employees:
                           •   local sourcing of raw materials and components
                           •   employment legislation to protect workers from
                           •   exploitation
                           •   barriers to entry of foreign firms
                           •   restrictions on the monopsony power of firms
                           •   nationalisation.
                         e) The impact of each measure on:
                           •   price
                           •   profit
                           •   efficiency
                           •   quality
                           •   choice.
                         f) Limits to government intervention:
                           •   regulatory capture
                           •   asymmetric information/information gaps
                           •   inadequate resources
                           •   lack of regulatory power.
 2 Government            a) The case for government intervention.
   intervention in
                         b) Types of government intervention in labour markets and their
   labour markets
                            effects:
                           • maximum wage controls
                           • minimum wage controls
                           • direct taxes e.g. national insurance contributions; corporation
                             tax
                           • measures to reduce geographical and occupational immobility
                             of labour
                           • measures to reduce discrimination and exploitation.




38                       Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –
                                    Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
Unit 4: Developments in the global economy

IAL compulsory unit

Externally assessed

4.1 Unit description
                                This unit develops the knowledge and skills gained in Unit 2. The
                                application, analysis and evaluation of economic models is
                                required, as well as an ability to assess policies that might be used
                                to deal with economic problems. An awareness of trends and
                                developments in the global economy over the last 40 years,
                                including contemporary issues, is required. Wider reading and
                                research will enable students to use up-to-date and relevant
                                examples in their analysis and evaluation of issues and
                                developments in the global economy.
                                Students will need to be able to apply relevant quantitative skills
                                to the content covered in this unit, including calculations, the use
                                of data and the drawing of diagrams. A full list of quantitative
                                skills can be found in Appendix 7: Quantitative skills.



4.2 Assessment information
                                • First assessment: June 2020.
                                • The examination lasts 2 hours.
                                • The paper is out of 80 marks.
                                • The paper will include multiple-choice, short-open response and
                                  extended-writing questions. Some of these will relate to sources
                                  provided in a Source booklet.
                                • The paper will include questions that target quantitative skills.
                                  This may include making and interpreting calculations, and
                                  drawing and interpreting diagrams.
                                • Questions may draw on any content covered in Units 1, 2
                                  and 3.
                                • Calculators may be used in the examination. See Appendix 8 for
                                  more information.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –                   39
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
4.3 Unit content
4.3.1 Causes and effects of globalisation

What students need to learn:

 1 Characteristics of    a) Increase in trade as a proportion of GDP.
   globalisation
                         b) Increase in importance of transnational companies (TNCs) and
                            foreign direct investment (FDI).
                         c) Increase in migration.
 2 Causes of             a) Factors contributing to increased globalisation in the last
   globalisation            50 years:
                           • trade liberalisation
                           • increased number and size of trading blocs
                           • political change (breakdown of the Soviet system and opening
                             up of China)
                           • reduced cost of transport and communications
                           • increased significance of TNCs.
                         b) FDI by TNCs:
                           • reasons for FDI
                           • the impact of FDI on recipient countries.
 3 Effects of            a) Possible benefits of globalisation:
   globalisation           •   increased economic growth
                           •   increased tax revenue
                           •   economies of scale
                           •   lower prices and higher consumer surplus
                           •   more choice
                           •   higher living standards.
                         b) Possible costs of globalisation:
                           •   displaced workers
                           •   exploitation of workers
                           •   environmental impact of increased trade
                           •   loss of tax revenue from transfer pricing
                           •   increased income inequality within countries
                           •   the influence of TNCs on domestic economic policy.




40                       Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –
                                    Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
4.3.2 Trade and the global economy

What students need to learn:

 1 Specialisation and          a) Benefits and costs of specialisation and trade in the international
   comparative                    context.
   advantage
                               b) The theory of comparative advantage:
                                  • the distinction between absolute and comparative advantage
                                  • assumptions underlying the theory of comparative advantage
                                  • limitations of the theory of comparative advantage.
 2 Patterns and                a) Factors influencing patterns of trade between countries and causes
   volume of world                of changes in these patterns:
   trade                          •   impact of emerging economies
                                  •   changes in comparative advantage
                                  •   growth in trading blocs and bilateral trading agreements
                                  •   changes in relative exchange rates
                                  •   changes in protectionism between countries.
                               b) Changes in trade flows between countries, and the reasons for
                                  these changes.
 3 Terms of trade              a) Understanding and calculation of the terms of trade.
                               b) Factors influencing a country’s terms of trade, changes in:
                                  •   relative inflation rates
                                  •   relative productivity rates
                                  •   relative labour costs
                                  •   the exchange rate
                                  •   the prices of imports and exports.
                               c) The impact of changes in a country’s terms of trade on:
                                  • export revenues
                                  • living standards
                                  • balance of trade.
 4 Trade                       a) The role of the World Trade Organization (WTO) in trade
   liberalisation and             liberalisation.
   trading blocs
                               b) Types of trading blocs:
                                  •   free-trade areas
                                  •   customs unions
                                  •   common markets
                                  •   economic and monetary unions.
                               c) Costs and benefits of membership of a trading bloc:
                                  •   trade creation
                                  •   trade diversion
                                  •   costs and prices
                                  •   economies of scale
                                  •   transaction costs
                                  •   movement of factors of production.
                               d) Possible conflicts between trading blocs and the WTO.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –                  41
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
4.3.2 Trade and the global economy (continued)

What students need to learn:

 5 Restrictions on       a) Reasons for restrictions on free trade:
   free trade              • to protect infant and geriatric industries
                           • to protect domestic industries and employment
                           • to protect national security
                           • to prevent dumping
                           • to correct a deficit on the current account of the balance of
                             payments
                           • to raise revenue.
                         b) Types of restrictions on free trade:
                           •   tariffs
                           •   quotas
                           •   non-tariff barriers
                           •   subsidies to domestic producers.
                         c) Impact of protectionist policies on:
                           •   consumers
                           •   producers
                           •   governments
                           •   living standards
                           •   equality.




42                       Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –
                                    Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
4.3.3 Balance of payments, exchange rates and international
      competitiveness

What students need to learn:

 1 Balance of                  a) Components of the balance of payments:
   payments                       • the current account
                                  • the capital and financial accounts.
                               b) Causes of deficits and surpluses on the current account.
                               c) Measures to reduce a country’s imbalance on the current
                                  account.
                               d) The significance of global trade imbalances.
 2 Exchange rates              a) The distinction between fixed, managed and floating exchange
                                  rates.
                               b) Government intervention in currency markets through:
                                  • foreign currency transactions
                                  • the use of interest rates
                                  • quantitative easing.
                               c) Factors influencing floating exchange rates:
                                  •   relative interest rates
                                  •   relative inflation rates (purchasing power parity theory)
                                  •   current account of the balance of payments
                                  •   strength of the economy
                                  •   capital flight
                                  •   expectations and speculation
                                  •   global factors, e.g. falls in commodity prices.
                               d) The distinction between revaluation and appreciation of a
                                  currency.
                               e) The distinction between devaluation and depreciation of a
                                  currency.
                               f) The impact of changes in exchange rates on:
                                  • the current account of the balance of payments (with
                                    reference to Marshall-Lerner condition and to the J-curve
                                    effect)
                                  • the capital and financial accounts of the balance of payments
                                  • economic growth
                                  • employment and unemployment
                                  • rate of inflation
                                  • FDI flows.
                               g) Competitive depreciations/devaluations and their consequences.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –                   43
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
4.3.3 Balance of payments, exchange rates and international
      competitiveness (continued)

What students need to learn:

 3 International         a) Measures of international competitiveness:
   competitiveness         • relative productivity rates
                           • relative unit labour costs
                           • relative export prices.
                         b) Factors influencing international competitiveness:
                           •   productivity
                           •   quality of human capital
                           •   exchange rate
                           •   wage and non-wage costs
                           •   regulations
                           •   quality of infrastructure
                           •   non-price factors.
                         c) Measures to increase international competitiveness:
                           •   policies to improve education and training
                           •   investment incentives
                           •   privatisation and deregulation
                           •   measures to reduce the exchange rate of the currency
                           •   trade liberalisation.
                         d) The significance of international competitiveness:
                           • advantages for an economy of being internationally
                             competitive
                           • problems for an economy of being internationally
                             uncompetitive.




44                       Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –
                                    Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
4.3.4 Poverty and inequality

What students need to learn:

 1 Poverty                     a) The distinction between absolute and relative poverty.
                               b) Measures of absolute and relative poverty.
                               c) Causes of changes in absolute and relative poverty:
                                  •   economic growth
                                  •   education and training
                                  •   welfare benefits
                                  •   changes in tax structure
                                  •   structural changes in the economy
                                  •   aid
                                  •   civil wars and conflict.
 2 Inequality                  a) The distinction between wealth inequality and income inequality.
                               b) Measurements of inequality:
                                  • the Lorenz curve
                                  • the Gini coefficient.
                               c) Causes of inequality in income and wealth within countries and
                                  between countries.
                               d) The impact of inequality on:
                                  •   enterprise
                                  •   incentives
                                  •   savings
                                  •   education
                                  •   migration
                                  •   life expectancy.
                               e) The impact of economic change and development on inequality.
                               f) The significance of the free market economy (capitalism) for
                                  inequality.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –                  45
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
4.3.5 The role of the state in the macroeconomy

What students need to learn:

 1 Public expenditure    a) The distinction between capital expenditure, current expenditure
                            and transfer payments.
                         b) Reasons for the changing size and pattern of public expenditure
                            in an international context:
                           • changing incomes
                           • changing age distributions
                           • changing expectations.
                         c) The significance of differing levels of public expenditure as a
                            proportion of GDP on:
                           • productivity and growth
                           • crowding out
                           • levels of taxation.
 2 Taxation              a) The distinction between, and examples of, direct and indirect
                            taxes.
                         b) The distinction between progressive, proportional and regressive
                            taxes.
                         c) The economic effects of changes in direct and indirect tax rates
                            on:
                           •   incentives to work
                           •   tax revenues: Laffer curve analysis
                           •   income distribution
                           •   real output and employment
                           •   the price level
                           •   the trade balance
                           •   FDI flows.
 3 Public sector         a) The distinction between:
   borrowing and           •   fiscal deficits and fiscal surpluses
   public sector debt      •   automatic stabilisers and discretionary fiscal policy
                           •   a fiscal deficit and the national debt
                           •   structural and cyclical fiscal deficits.
                         b) Factors influencing the size of fiscal deficits and national debts.
                         c) The significance of the size of fiscal deficits and national debts:
                           • impact on interest rates
                           • debt servicing
                           • intergenerational equity.




46                       Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –
                                    Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
4.3.5 The role of the state in the macroeconomy (continued)

What students need to learn:

 4 Macroeconomic               a) How governments use fiscal policy, monetary policy, exchange-
   policies                       rate policy, supply-side policies and direct controls to:
                                  •   reduce fiscal deficits and national debts
                                  •   control the rate of inflation
                                  •   respond to external shocks in the global economy
                                  •   reduce poverty and inequality.
                               b) Use of demand-side policies in response to the global financial
                                  crisis of 2008.
                               c) Measures to control TNCs:
                                  • to reduce tax avoidance
                                  • the regulation of transfer pricing
                                  • limits to government ability to control TNCs.
                               d) The impact of policy changes on:
                                  • local economies
                                  • national economies
                                  • the global economy.
                               e) Problems facing policymakers when applying policies:
                                  • inaccurate information
                                  • risks and uncertainties
                                  • inability to control external shocks.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –                 47
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
4.3.6 Growth and development in developing, emerging and developed
      economies

What students need to learn:

 1 Measures of           a) The three components of the Human Development Index (HDI):
   economic                 education, health, income; how they are measured.
   development
                         b) Advantages and limitations of the HDI in comparing living
                            standards between countries and over time.
                         c) Other measures of development:
                           •   the percentage of adult male labour in agriculture
                           •   access to clean water
                           •   energy consumption per capita
                           •   access to internet per thousand of population
                           •   access to mobile phones per thousand of population
                           •   access to doctors per thousand of population.
 2 Constraints on        a) The impact of economic factors in different countries:
   growth and              •   volatility of commodity prices
   development             •   primary product dependency (the Prebisch-Singer hypothesis)
                           •   savings gap (the Harrod-Domar model)
                           •   foreign currency gap
                           •   capital flight
                           •   demographic factors (size and age distribution of population;
                               migration)
                           •   debt (household and overseas)
                           •   access to credit and banking
                           •   infrastructure
                           •   education and skills.
                         b) The impact of non-economic factors in different countries:
                           •   corruption
                           •   poor governance
                           •   civil wars
                           •   migration
                           •   terrorism.




48                       Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –
                                    Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
4.3.6 Growth and development in developing, emerging and developed
      economies (continued)

What students need to learn:

 3 Measures to                 a) The impact of market-orientated strategies:
   promote growth                 •   trade liberalisation
   and development                •   promotion of FDI
                                  •   removal of government subsidies
                                  •   privatisation
                                  •   floating exchange rate systems
                                  •   microfinance schemes.
                               b) The impact of interventionist strategies:
                                  •   development of human capital
                                  •   protectionism
                                  •   managed exchange rates
                                  •   infrastructure development
                                  •   promoting joint ventures with TNCs
                                  •   buffer stock schemes.
                               c) The impact of other strategies:
                                  •   industrialisation (the Lewis structural dual-sector model)
                                  •   development of tourism
                                  •   development of primary industries
                                  •   debt relief
                                  •   aid.
                               d) The role of international institutions:
                                  • the World Bank
                                  • the International Monetary Fund (IMF)
                                  • non-government organisations (NGOs).




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –                    49
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
Assessment information

Assessment requirements
The Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary in Economics consists of two
externally-examined units.
The Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Level in Economics consists of four
externally-examined units.
Students must complete all assessments.
Please see the Assessment availability and first award section for information on when the
assessment for each unit will be available from.


 Unit               IAS or      Assessment information                                      Number of
                    IA2                                                                     raw marks
 Unit 1: Markets    IAS         Written examination: 1 hour, 45 minutes                     80 marks
 in action
                                Section A: Six multiple-choice questions (6 marks).

                                Section B: Five short-answer questions (20 marks).

                                Section C: A five-part question, based on data
                                provided in a Source booklet (34 marks).

                                Section D: One 20-mark essay question from a
                                choice of two (20 marks).

 Unit 2:            IAS         Same as for Unit 1.                                         80 marks
 Macroeconomic
 performance
 and policy

 Unit 3: Business   IA2         Written examination: 2 hours                                80 marks
 behaviour
                                Section A: Six multiple-choice questions (6 marks).

                                Section B: A five-part question, based on data
                                provided in a Source booklet (34 marks).

                                Section C: Two 20-mark essay questions from a
                                choice of three (40 marks).

 Unit 4:            IA2         Same as for Unit 3.                                         80 marks
 Developments in
 the global
 economy


Sample assessment materials
Sample papers and mark schemes can be found in the Pearson Edexcel International
Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics Sample Assessment Materials (SAMs)
document.
A full list of command words that will be used in the assessments can be found in
Appendix 6 of this specification.




50                           Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –
                                        Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
Assessment objectives and weightings
                                                                                  % in     % in      % in
                                                                                  IAS      IA2       IAL
 AO1         Demonstrate knowledge of terms, concepts, theories and
             models to show an understanding of the behaviour of                  27.5     18.8      23.1
             economic agents
 AO2         Apply knowledge and understanding to various economic
                                                                                   30      22.5      26.3
             contexts
 AO3         Analyse issues and evidence, showing an understanding
                                                                                  22.5     28.8      25.6
             of their impact on economic agents
 AO4         Evaluate economic arguments and use appropriate
                                                                                   20          30     25
             evidence to support informed judgements
NB Percentages may not add up to 100 due to rounding.



Relationship of assessment objectives to units for the
International Advanced Subsidiary qualification
 Unit number                                                           Assessment objective
                                                              AO1          AO2      AO3             AO4
 Unit 1                                                      13.8%         15%      11.3%           10%
 Unit 2                                                      13.8%         15%      11.3%           10%
 Total for International Advanced
                                                             27.5%         30%     22.5%            20%
 Subsidiary
NB Percentages may not add up to 100 due to rounding.



Relationship of assessment objectives to units for the
International Advanced Level qualification
 Unit number                                                           Assessment objective
                                                               AO1          AO2         AO3         AO4
 Unit 1                                                       6.9%         7.5%         5.6%        5%
 Unit 2                                                       6.9%         7.5%         5.6%        5%
 Unit 3                                                       4.7%         5.6%         7.2%        7.5%
 Unit 4                                                       4.7%         5.6%         7.2%        7.5%
 Total for International Advanced Level                      23.1%        26.3%     25.6%           25%
NB Percentages may not add up to 100 due to rounding.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –                       51
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
Assessment availability and first award
 Unit             January           June             October            January              June
                   2019             2019              2019               2020                2020
 1                                                                                          
 2                                                                                          
 3                                                                                          
 4                                                                                          
 IAS award                                                                                  
 IAL award                                                                                  


From June 2020, all four units will be assessed in January, June and October for the
lifetime of the qualifications.
From June 2020 IAL and IAS will both be awarded in January, June and October for the
lifetime of the qualifications.




52                       Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –
                                    Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
Administration and general information

Entries and resitting of units

Entries
Details of how to enter students for the examinations for these qualifications can be found in
our International Information Manual. A copy is made available to all examinations officers
and is available on our website, qualifications.pearson.com.


Resitting of units
Students can resit any unit irrespective of whether the qualification is to be cashed in. If a
student resits a unit more than once, only the better of the two most recent attempts of that
unit will be available for aggregation to a qualification grade. Please refer to the
Entry, Aggregation and Certification document on our website:
qualifications.pearson.com/IAL-entry-certification-procedures.


Access arrangements, reasonable adjustments,
special consideration and malpractice
Equality and fairness are central to our work. Our equality policy requires all students to
have equal opportunity to access our qualifications and assessments, and our qualifications
to be awarded in a way that is fair to every student.
We are committed to making sure that:
• students with a protected characteristic (as defined by the UK Equality Act 2010) are not,
  when they are undertaking one of our qualifications, disadvantaged in comparison to
  students who do not share that characteristic
• all students achieve the recognition they deserve for undertaking a qualification and that
  this achievement can be compared fairly to the achievement of their peers.


Language of assessment
Assessment of these qualifications will be available in English only. All student work must be
in English.
We recommend that students are able to read and write in English at Level B2 of the
Common European Framework of Reference for Languages.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –             53
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
Access arrangements
Access arrangements are agreed before an assessment. They allow students with special
educational needs, disabilities or temporary injuries to:
• access the assessment
• show what they know and can do without changing the demands of the assessment.
The intention behind an access arrangement is to meet the particular needs of an individual
student with a disability without affecting the integrity of the assessment. Access
arrangements are the principal way in which awarding bodies comply with the duty under
the Equality Act 2010 to make ‘reasonable adjustments’.
Access arrangements should always be processed at the start of the course. Students will
then know what is available and have the access arrangement(s) in place for assessment.


Reasonable adjustments
The Equality Act 2010 requires an awarding organisation to make reasonable adjustments
where a student with a disability would be at a substantial disadvantage in undertaking an
assessment. The awarding organisation is required to take reasonable steps to overcome
that disadvantage.
A reasonable adjustment for a particular student may be unique to that individual and
therefore might not be in the list of available access arrangements.
Whether an adjustment will be considered reasonable will depend on a number of factors,
including:
• the needs of the student with the disability
• the effectiveness of the adjustment
• the cost of the adjustment; and
• the likely impact of the adjustment on the student with the disability and other students.
An adjustment will not be approved if it involves unreasonable costs to the awarding
organisation, timeframes or affects the security or integrity of the assessment. This is
because the adjustment is not ‘reasonable’.


Special consideration
Special consideration is a post-examination adjustment to a student's mark or grade to
reflect temporary injury, illness or other indisposition at the time of the examination/
assessment, which has had, or is reasonably likely to have had, a material effect on a
student’s ability to take an assessment or demonstrate their level of attainment in an
assessment.


Further information
Please see our website for further information about how to apply for access arrangements
and special consideration.
For further information about access arrangements, reasonable adjustments and special
consideration please refer to the JCQ website: www.jcq.org.uk.




54                         Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –
                                      Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
Candidate malpractice
Candidate malpractice refers to any act by a candidate that compromises or seeks to
compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the integrity of the
qualifications or the validity of results/certificates.
Candidate malpractice in examinations must be reported to Pearson using a
JCQ Form M1 (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice). The form can be
emailed to pqsmalpractice@pearson.com or posted to: Investigations Team, Pearson,
190 High Holborn, London, WC1V 7BH. Please provide as much information and supporting
documentation as possible. Note that the final decision regarding appropriate sanctions lies
with Pearson.
Failure to report malpractice constitutes staff or centre malpractice.


Staff/centre malpractice
Staff and centre malpractice includes both deliberate malpractice and maladministration of
our qualifications. As with candidate malpractice, staff and centre malpractice is any act that
compromises or seeks to compromise the process of assessment or which undermines the
integrity of the qualifications or the validity of results/certificates.
All cases of suspected staff malpractice and maladministration must be reported
immediately, before any investigation is undertaken by the centre, to Pearson on a
JCQ Form M2(a) (available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice).
The form, supporting documentation and as much information as possible can be emailed to
pqsmalpractice@pearson.com or posted to: Investigations Team, Pearson,
190 High Holborn, London, WC1V 7BH. Note that the final decision regarding
appropriate sanctions lies with Pearson.
Failure to report malpractice itself constitutes malpractice.
More-detailed guidance on malpractice can be found in the latest version of the document
JCQ General and vocational qualifications Suspected Malpractice in Examinations and
Assessments, available at www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office/malpractice.


Awarding and reporting
The Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary in Economics will be graded on a
five-grade scale from A to E. The Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Level in
Economics will be graded on a six-point scale A* to E. Individual unit results will be
reported. Only Units 1 and 2 will contribute to the International Advanced Subsidiary grade.
All four units will contribute to the International Advanced Level grade.
The first certification opportunity for the Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary
in Economics will be in August 2019. The first certification opportunity for the Pearson
Edexcel International Advanced Level in Economics will be in August 2020. A pass in an
International Advanced Subsidiary subject is indicated by one of the five grades A, B, C, D,
E, of which grade A is the highest and grade E the lowest. A pass in an International
Advanced Level subject is indicated by one of the six grades A*, A, B, C, D, E, of which
grade A* is the highest and grade E the lowest. Students whose level of achievement is
below the minimum judged by Pearson to be of sufficient standard to be recorded on a
certificate will receive an unclassified U result.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –              55
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
Unit results
Students will receive a uniform mark between 0 and the maximum uniform mark for
each unit.
The uniform marks at each grade threshold for each unit are:
Units 1, 2, 3 and 4
                     Maximum
 Unit grade                               A          B          C           D          E
                   uniform mark
                        100              80         70          60         50         40




Qualification results
The minimum uniform marks required for each grade:
International Advanced Subsidiary (cash-in code: XEC11)
 Qualification       Maximum
                                          A          B          C           D          E
 grade             uniform mark
                        200             160        140         120        100         80
Students with a uniform mark in the range 0–79 will be Unclassified (U).


International Advanced Level (cash-in code: YEC11)
 Qualification       Maximum
                                          A          B          C           D          E
 grade             uniform mark
                        400             320        280         240        200         160
Students with a uniform mark in the range 0–159 will be Unclassified (U).
To be awarded an A*, students will need to achieve an A for the International Advanced
Level qualification (at least 320 uniform marks) and at least 90% of the total uniform mark
available across the IA2 units combined (at least 180 uniform marks).




56                        Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –
                                     Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
Student recruitment and progression
Pearson follows the JCQ policy concerning recruitment to our qualifications in that:
• they must be available to anyone who is capable of reaching the required standard
• they must be free from barriers that restrict access and progression
• equal opportunities exist for all students.


Prior learning and other requirements
There are no formal prior learning or other requirements for these qualifications.
Students who would benefit most from studying these qualifications are likely to have a
qualification in a numerate subject such as an International GCSE in Mathematics.


Progression
Students can progress from these qualifications to:
●   higher-education courses such as an economics degree with a focus on theory, or a
    degree in applied economics, such as environmental economics, labour economics, public
    sector economics or monetary economics. Alternatively, students may choose to go on to
    study a business economics, mathematical economics or business degree
●   a wide range of careers ranging from finance, banking, insurance, accountancy,
    management and consultancy to becoming professional economists.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –           57
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
58   Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –
                Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
Appendices

        Appendix 1: Codes                                                         60
        Appendix 2: Pearson World Class Qualification design principles           61
        Appendix 3: Transferable skills                                           63
        Appendix 4: Level 3 Extended Project qualification                        65
        Appendix 5: Glossary                                                      67
        Appendix 6: Command word taxonomy                                         68
        Appendix 7: Quantitative skills                                           69
        Appendix 8: Use of calculators                                            70




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –   59
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
Appendix 1: Codes

Type of code    Use of code                                     Code
Unit codes      Each unit is assigned a code. This unit         Unit 1: WEC11/01
                code is used as an entry code to
                                                                Unit 2: WEC12/01
                indicate that a student wishes to take
                the assessment for that unit. Centres           Unit 3: WEC13/01
                will need to use the unit codes only
                                                                Unit 4: WEC14/01
                when entering students for their
                examination.
Cash-in codes   The cash-in code is used as a code to           International Advanced
                aggregate the student’s unit scores to          Subsidiary – XEC11
                obtain the overall grade for the
                                                                International Advanced
                qualification.
                                                                Level – YEC11




60                   Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –
                                Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
Appendix 2: Pearson World Class Qualification
design principles
Pearson’s World Class Qualification design principles mean that all Edexcel qualifications are
developed to be rigorous, demanding, inclusive and empowering.




We work collaboratively to gain approval from an external panel of educational
thought-leaders and assessment experts from across the globe. This is to ensure that
Edexcel qualifications are globally relevant, represent world-class best practice in
qualification and assessment design, maintain a consistent standard and support learner
progression in today’s fast-changing world.
Pearson’s Expert Panel for World-Class Qualifications is chaired by Sir Michael Barber, a
leading authority on education systems and reform. He is joined by a wide range of key
influencers with expertise in education and employability.
“I’m excited to be in a position to work with the global leaders in curriculum and assessment
to take a fresh look at what young people need to know and be able to do in the 21st
century, and to consider how we can give them the opportunity to access that sort of
education.” Sir Michael Barber.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –             61
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
Endorsement from Pearson’s Expert Panel for World Class
Qualifications for the International Advanced Subsidiary
(IAS)/International Advanced Level (IAL) development process
December 2015
“We were chosen, either because of our expertise in the UK education system, or because of
our experience in reforming qualifications in other systems around the world as diverse as
Singapore, Hong Kong, Australia and a number of countries across Europe.
We have guided Pearson through what we judge to be a rigorous world class qualification
development process that has included, where appropriate:
• extensive international comparability of subject content against the highest-performing
  jurisdictions in the world
• benchmarking assessments against UK and overseas providers to ensure that they are at
  the right level of demand
• establishing External Subject Advisory Groups, drawing on independent subject-specific
  expertise to challenge and validate our qualifications.
Importantly, we have worked to ensure that the content and learning is future oriented, and
that the design has been guided by Pearson’s Efficacy Framework. This is a structured,
evidenced process which means that learner outcomes have been at the heart of this
development throughout.
We understand that ultimately it is excellent teaching that is the key factor to a learner’s
success in education but as a result of our work as a panel we are confident that we have
supported the development of Edexcel IAS and IAL qualifications that are outstanding for
their coherence, thoroughness and attention to detail and can be regarded as representing
world-class best practice.”


 Sir Michael Barber (Chair)                         Professor Lee Sing Kong
 Chief Education Advisor, Pearson plc               Dean and Managing Director, National
                                                    Institute of Education International,
                                                    Singapore
 Dr Peter Hill                                      Bahram Bekhradnia
 Former Chief Executive ACARA                       President, Higher Education Policy Institute
 Professor Jonathan Osborne                         Dame Sally Coates
 Stanford University                                Director of Academies (South), United
                                                    Learning Trust
 Professor Dr Ursula Renold                         Professor Bob Schwartz
 Federal Institute of Technology, Switzerland       Harvard Graduate School of Education
 Professor Janice Kay                               Jane Beine
 Provost, University of Exeter                      Head of Partner Development, John Lewis
                                                    Partnership
 Jason Holt
 CEO, Holts Group


All titles correct as at December 2015.




62                         Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –
                                      Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
Appendix 3: Transferable skills

The need for transferable skills
In recent years, higher-education institutions and employers have consistently flagged the
need for students to develop a range of transferable skills to enable them to respond with
confidence to the demands of undergraduate study and the world of work.
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) defines skills, or
competencies, as ‘the bundle of knowledge, attributes and capacities that can be learned
and that enable individuals to successfully and consistently perform an activity or task and
can be built upon and extended through learning.’[1]
To support the design of our qualifications, the Pearson Research Team selected and
evaluated seven global 21st-century skills frameworks. Following on from this process, we
identified the National Research Council’s (NRC) framework [2] as the most evidence-based
and robust skills framework, and have used this as a basis for our adapted skills framework.
The framework includes cognitive, intrapersonal skills and interpersonal skills.




The skills have been interpreted for this specification to ensure that they are appropriate for
the subject. All of the skills listed are evident or accessible in the teaching, learning and/or
assessment of the qualifications. Some skills are directly assessed. Pearson materials will
support you in identifying these skills and developing these skills in students.
The table overleaf sets out the framework and gives an indication of the skills that can be
found in economics and indicates the interpretation of the skill in this area. A full subject
interpretation of each skill, with mapping to show opportunities for student development is
given on the subject pages of our website: qualifications.pearson.com




1
    OECD – Better Skills, Better Jobs, Better Lives (OECD Publishing, 2012)
2
    Koenig, J A, National Research Council - Assessing 21st Century Skills: Summary of a Workshop
    (National Academies Press, 2011)


Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –                     63
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
                            Cognitive           •   Critical thinking
                            processes and
                                                •   Problem solving                                  Thinking critically about
                            strategies




     Cognitive skills
                                                                                                     economics ideas and issues.
                                                •   Analysis
                                                                                                     Using various economic
                                                •   Reasoning/argumentation                          concepts and economic data to
                                                                                                     synthesise the information to
                                                •   Interpretation                                   make judgements.
                                                •   Decision making

                                                •   Adaptive learning

                                                •   Executive function

                            Creativity          •   Creativity

                                                •   Innovation

                            Intellectual        •   Adaptability
                            openness
                                                •   Personal and social responsibility               The notion that businesses and
                                                                                                     individuals need to act for the
                                                •   Continuous learning                              benefit of society at large.
                                                                                                     Appreciate ethical issues




     Intrapersonal skills
                                                •   Intellectual interest and curiosity
                                                                                                     relating to economic issues
                            Work ethic/         •   Initiative
                            conscientiousness
                                                •   Self-direction

                                                •   Responsibility

                                                •   Perseverance

                                                •   Productivity

                                                •   Self-regulation (metacognition,
                                                    forethought, reflection)

                                                •   Ethics

                                                •   Integrity

                            Positive core       •   Self-monitoring/self-evaluation/
                            self-evaluation         self-reinforcement

                            Teamwork and        •   Communication
                            collaboration
                                                •   Collaboration                                    The imparting or exchanging of




     Interpersonal skills
                                                •   Teamwork                                         information by speaking or
                                                                                                     writing. Able to communicate
                                                •   Cooperation                                      an Economic concept to others
                                                                                                     verbally or in written forms.
                                                •   Empathy/perspective taking
                                                                                                     Answer questions on the issue.
                                                •   Negotiation

                            Leadership          •   Leadership

                                                •   Responsibility

                                                •   Assertive communication

                                                •   Self-presentation




64                                              Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –
                                                             Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
Appendix 4: Level 3 Extended Project qualification

What is the Extended Project?
The Extended Project is a standalone qualification that can be taken alongside International
Advanced Level (IAL) qualifications. It supports the development of independent learning
skills and helps to prepare students for their next step – whether that be higher education or
employment. The qualification:
• is recognised by higher education for the skills it develops
• is worth half of an International Advanced Level (IAL) qualification at grades A*–E
• carries UCAS points for university entry.
The Extended Project encourages students to develop skills in the following areas: research,
critical thinking, extended writing and project management. Students identify and agree a
topic area of their choice for in-depth study (which may or may not be related to an IAL
subject they are already studying), guided by their teacher.
Students can choose from one of four approaches to produce:
• a dissertation (for example an investigation based on predominately secondary research)
• an investigation/field study (for example a practical experiment)
• a performance (for example in music, drama or sport)
• an artefact (for example creating a sculpture in response to a client brief or solving an
  engineering problem).
The qualification is non-examination assessment based and students are assessed on the
skills of managing, planning and evaluating their project. Students will research their topic,
develop skills to review and evaluate the information, and then present the final outcome of
their project.
The Extended Project has 120 guided learning hours (GLH) consisting of a 40-GLH taught
element that includes teaching the technical skills (for example research skills) and an
80-GLH guided element that includes mentoring students through the project work. The
qualification is 100% internally assessed and externally moderated.

How to link the Extended Project with Economics
The Extended Project creates the opportunity to develop transferable skills for progression to
higher education and to the workplace through the exploration of either an area of personal
interest or a topic of interest from within the economics qualification content.
Through the Extended Project, students will develop skills that support their study of
economics, including:
• conducting, organising and using research
• independent reading in the subject area
• planning, project management and time management
• defining a hypothesis to be tested in investigations or developing a design brief
• collecting, handling and interpreting data and evidence
• evaluating arguments and processes, including arguments in favour of alternative
  interpretations of data and evaluation of experimental methodology
• critical thinking.



Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –               65
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
In the context of the Extended Project, critical thinking refers to the ability to identify and
develop arguments for a point of view or hypothesis and to consider and respond to
alternative arguments. This supports the development of evaluative skills, through
evaluating economic arguments and using qualitative and quantitative evidence to support
informed judgements and propose evidence-based solutions to economic issues.

Types of Extended Project related to economics
Students may produce a dissertation on any topic that can be researched and argued,
such as:
• Is fair trade actually fair?
• Does income inequality help or harm economic growth?
The dissertation uses secondary research sources to provide a reasoned defence or a point
of view, with consideration of counter-arguments.
An alternative might be an investigative project or field study involving the collection of data
from primary research, for example a study of the impact of unemployment on a local
community.

Using the Extended Project to support breadth and depth
In the Extended Project, students are assessed on the quality of the work they produce and
the skills they develop and demonstrate through completing this work. Students should
demonstrate that they have extended themselves in some significant way beyond what they
have been studying in economics. Students can demonstrate extension in one or more
dimensions:
• deepening understanding – where a student explores a topic in greater depth than in
  the specification content
• broadening skills – where a student learns a new skill. This might be learning how to
  design a website or learning a new statistical technique that can be used in the analysis of
  either primary or secondary data collected by the student
• widening perspectives – where the student’s project spans different subjects.
  A student studying economics with history may wish to research the influence of an
  economic thinker such as Keynes or Hayek. A student studying economics with geography
  may wish to research the economic development of a particular country or the impact of
  an industry on the landscape. A student studying economics with mathematics may wish
  to use statistical techniques to analyse macroeconomic data and research one aspect of
  the economy in more detail. A student studying economics with psychology may wish to
  conduct an experiment into economic behaviour.
A wide range of information to support the delivery and assessment of the Extended Project,
including the specification, teacher guidance for all aspects, an editable scheme of work and
exemplars for all four approaches, can be found on our website.




66                          Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –
                                       Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
Appendix 5: Glossary

 Term                               Definition
 Assessment objectives              The requirements that students need to meet to succeed in the
                                    qualification. Each assessment objective has a unique focus, which
                                    is then targeted in examinations or coursework. Assessment
                                    objectives may be assessed individually or in combination.

 External assessment                An examination that is held at the same time and place in a global
                                    region.

 International Advanced             Abbreviated to IAS.
 Subsidiary

 International Advanced Level       Abbreviated to IAL.

 International A2 (IA2)             The additional content required for an IAL.

 Linear                             Linear qualifications have all assessments at the end of a course of
                                    study. It is not possible to take one assessment earlier in the
                                    course of study.

 Modular                            Modular qualifications contain units of assessment. These units can
                                    be taken during the course of study. The final qualification grade is
                                    worked out from the combined unit results.

 Raw marks                          Raw marks are the actual marks that students achieve when taking
                                    an assessment. When calculating an overall grade, raw marks often
                                    need to be converted so that it is possible to see the proportionate
                                    achievement of a student across all units of study.

 Uniform Mark Scale (UMS)           Student actual marks (or raw marks) will be converted into a UMS
                                    mark so that it is possible to see the proportionate result of a
                                    student. Two units may each be worth 25% of a total qualification.
                                    The raw marks for each unit may differ but the uniform mark will
                                    be the same.

 Unit                               A modular qualification will be divided into a number of units. Each
                                    unit will have its own assessment.




Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –                          67
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
Appendix 6: Command word taxonomy
The table below lists the command words that will be used in the question papers along with
an outline of what each type of question requires students to do.



 Command        Number      What students are required to do
                of marks
 Define         2           Requires knowledge and understanding only. Requires students to give
                            the meaning of a term, concept or phrase.

 Calculate      2 or 4      Assesses quantitative skills. Requires a calculation involving several
                            stages based on given data and may involve the use of a prescribed
                            diagram or formula. Calculators may be used. Students are advised to
                            show workings.

 Draw           4           Assesses quantitative skills. Requires students to construct an accurately
                            labelled diagram, using quantitative skills. Students may be required to
                            decide on a type of diagram, or the type required may be stated.

 Explain        4           When asking students to explain a term or the characteristics, this
                            requires knowledge, understanding and application.

                            When asking students to explain a reason or impact, this also includes
                            analysis as it requires a two-stage chain of reasoning.

 Analyse        6           Requires knowledge, understanding, application and analysis. Requires
                            an explanation which includes a chain of reasoning, and diagrams where
                            appropriate. Focuses on depth rather than breadth. Any relevant data
                            provided needs to be interpreted. Does not include evaluation.

 Examine        8           Requires knowledge, understanding, application, analysis and
                            evaluation. Requires an explanation which includes a chain of reasoning,
                            and diagrams where appropriate. Focuses on depth rather than breadth.
                            Any relevant data provided needs to be interpreted. There should be a
                            brief assessment of the arguments/factors/evidence.

 Discuss        14          Requires knowledge, understanding, application, analysis and
                            evaluation. Logical and coherent chains of reasoning need to be
                            developed with reference to context where appropriate. The validity and
                            significance of arguments/models and concepts should be considered
                            and supported by relevant chains of reasoning. There should also be a
                            recognition of different viewpoints and/or a critical assessment of the
                            evidence.

 Evaluate/ To   20          Requires knowledge, understanding, application, analysis and
 what extent                evaluation. Logical and coherent multi-stage chains of reasoning need to
                            be developed with reference to context where appropriate. The validity
                            and significance of arguments/models and concepts should be
                            considered and supported by relevant chains of reasoning. There should
                            also be a recognition of different viewpoints and/or a critical assessment
                            of the evidence so that informed judgements arguments may be made.




68                         Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –
                                      Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
Appendix 7: Quantitative skills
Throughout the course of study, students will develop competence in the quantitative skills
listed below. There are opportunities for students to develop these skills throughout the
content and they are required to apply the skills to relevant economic contexts.
The assessment of quantitative skills 1–9 will constitute a minimum of 20% of the overall
marks for both the International Advanced Subsidiary and the International Advanced Level.


    IAS                                                  IA2

    QS1 Calculate, use and understand ratios and         QS1 Calculate, use and understand ratios and
    fractions                                            fractions

    QS2 Calculate, use and understand percentages,       QS2 Calculate, use and understand percentages,
    percentage changes and percentage point              percentage changes and percentage point
    changes                                              changes

    QS3 Understand and use the terms mean and            QS3 Understand and use the terms mean,
    median                                               median and relevant quantiles 3

    QS4 Construct and interpret a range of standard      QS4 Construct and interpret a range of standard
    graphical forms                                      graphical forms

    QS5 Calculate and interpret index numbers            QS5 Calculate and interpret index numbers

    QS6 Calculate total revenue                          QS6 Calculate cost, revenue and profit
                                                         (marginal, average, totals)

    –                                                    QS7 Make calculations to convert from money to
                                                         real terms

    QS8 Make calculations of elasticity and interpret    QS8 Make calculations of elasticity and interpret
    the result                                           the result

    QS9 Interpret, apply and analyse information in      QS9 Interpret, apply and analyse information in
    written, graphical, tabular and numerical forms      written, graphical tabular and numerical forms


In addition, there are three quantitative skills that may be assessed but which do not
contribute to the 20% target.

    IAS                                                  IA2
    QS10 Distinguish between changes in the level        QS10 Distinguish between changes in the level
    of a variable, and the rate of change                of a variable, and the rate of change

    –                                                    QS11 Understand composite indicators

    QS12 Understand the meaning of seasonally            QS12 Understand the meaning of seasonally-
    adjusted figures                                     adjusted figures




3
    Percentile, decile, quintile, quartile


Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –                          69
Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
Appendix 8: Use of calculators
Students may use a calculator in the assessments for these qualifications. Centres are
responsible for making sure that calculators used by their students meet the requirements
given in the table below.
Students must be familiar with the requirements before their assessments for these
qualifications.


  Calculators must be:                                                  Calculators must not:
  • of a size suitable for use on the desk                              • be designed or adapted to offer any of
                                                                          these facilities:
  • either battery or solar powered
                                                                             o language translators
  • free of lids, cases and covers which
    have printed instructions or formulas.                                   o symbolic algebra manipulation
  The student is responsible for the                                         o symbolic differentiation or integration
  following:
                                                                             o communication with other machines or
  • the calculator’s power supply                                              the internet.
  • the calculator’s working condition                                  • be borrowed from another student during
                                                                          an examination for any reason*
  • clearing anything stored in the
    calculator.                                                         • have retrievable information stored in
                                                                          them – this includes:
                                                                             o databanks
                                                                             o dictionaries
                                                                             o mathematical formulas
                                                                             o text.
*An invigilator may give a student a calculator.
Further information can be found in the JCQ documents Instructions for conducting
examinations and Information for candidates for written examinations, available at
www.jcq.org.uk/exams-office.




ma010618V:\LT\PD\IALS 2018\9781446949542_IAL_ECONOMICS\9781446949542_IAL_ECONOMICS_ISS2\9781446949542_IAL_ECONOMICS_ISS2.DOCX.1–75/2



70                                         Pearson Edexcel International Advanced Subsidiary/Advanced Level in Economics –
                                                           Specification – Issue 2 – June 2018 © Pearson Education Limited 2018
FOR INFORMATION ABOUT EDEXCEL, BTEC OR LCCI QUALIFICATIONS
VISIT QUALIFICATIONS.PEARSON.COM

EDEXCEL IS A REGISTERED TRADEMARK OF PEARSON EDUCATION LIMITED

PEARSON EDUCATION LIMITED. REGISTERED IN ENGLAND AND WALES NO. 872828
REGISTERED OFFICE: 80 STRAND, LONDON WC2R 0RL
VAT REG NO GB 278 537121

GETTY IMAGES: ALEX BELMONLINSKY
